THE HIDDEN SIDE OF CHRISTIAN FESTIVALS

CHARLES W. LEADBEATER

Regionary Bishop of The Liberal Catholic Church for Australasia

THE ST. ALBAN PRESS Los Angeles : London : Sydney

1920

CONTENTS

PART ONE - The Festivals

- Foreword
- Introduction: The Church's Year
- Chapter 1 — Advent
- Chapter II — Christmas
- Chapter III - New Year's Day
- Chapter IV - The Epiphany
- Chapter V - The Baptism of Our Lord
- Chapter VI — The Transfiguration
- Chapter VII - Lent
  - Our Attitude Towards Lent
  - The Sundays in Lent
    - Refreshment Sunday
  - Holy Week
  - The Services in Holy Week
    - Palm Sunday
    - Maundy Thursday
    - Good Friday
    - Holy Saturday
- Chapter VIII - Easter
- Chapter IX - Ascension Day
- Chapter X - Whitsun-Day
- Chapter XI - Trinity Sunday
- Chapter XII — Corpus Christi
- Chapter XIII - Feasts of our Lady
  - The Mother of Jesus
  - The Virgin Matter
  - The Feminine Aspect of the Deity
- Chapter XIV - The Festival of the Angels
  - The Higher Angels
  - The Lower Angels
- Chapter XV - Festivals of the Saints
  - Our Attitude Towards the Saints
  - Patron Saints
- Chapter XVI - Brief Notes Upon Some of the Saints
  - St. Alban
  - St. George
  - St. Patrick
  - St. Mark
- Chapter XVII - All Saints' Day
- Chapter XVIII - All Souls' Day

PART TWO - Some Days of Special Interest

- Chapter XIX - The Faith of Our Fathers
- Chapter XX - Our Attitude Towards Life
- Chapter XXI - The Greatest of These
- Chapter XXII - Discernment
- Chapter XXIII - Wisdom
- Chapter XXIV - Self-Dedication
- Chapter XXV - Perseverance
- Chapter XXVI - Good Works
- Chapter XXVII - God as Light
- Chapter XXVIII - Forethought

PART THREE - Addresses During the War

- Chapter XXIX — The Truth About the War
- Chapter XXX — On the Anniversary of the Outbreak of War
- Chapter XXXI — On God's Side
- Chapter XXXII — The Future

FOREWORD

These notes on the Church's Year were originally intended to be a chapter in the first volume of this series, The Science of the Sacraments. It was found, however, that that book was already becoming unwieldy, and that there was more to be said about the ecclesiastical year than could be compressed into a single chapter; so it seemed best to devote a separate volume to its consideration. This has also made it possible to add to it a few miscellaneous addresses on points of importance.

The book is to a large extent the reproduction of a series of sermons given for the instruction of a congregation to whose members the ideas contained in it were novel. Amid much pressure of work along other lines I have not had leisure to weld these into a continuous treatise; and as it is not probable that in this incarnation I shall have that leisure, and as other congregations desire information on these subjects, it seems best to let the sermons go forth with but little correction or addition. Occasional repetitions and colloquialisms will no dou'bt be found in the book, therefore; but I hope that it may nevertheless be not without some value to students of liberal Christianity, and indeed of religion in general.

C.W.L.

> Source: https://archive.org/details/hiddensideofchri00leadrich

PART ONE - The Festivals

INTRODUCTION

THE CHURCH'S YEAR

God has a plan for man, and that plan is evolution. We have come forth from Him, and to Him we are to return. The oriental philosophers tell us that we are on the nivritti marga, or path of return, and a modern poet puts the same idea in other words: "All the aim of life is just climbing back to God." Christ's Church exists solely to help mankind in this process, and she has many ingenious methods of offering that help. One of them is the arrangement of the ecclesiastical year, which differs somewhat from that of civil life.

Broadly speaking, it divides itself into two parts, the first of which is devoted to setting before us dramatically the various stages of the path we have to tread, and the second to the practical application of what has been taught. Through both parts are scattered various festivals, each of which is intended to remind us of some point which it is useful for us to remember, and to call upon us to make a special effort in connection with it; and to make this easier, extra outpourings of force from the higher world are arranged for such occasions. As it is put in our Liturgy : ' ' The first portion of the Church's year, from Advent to Whitsuntide, is devoted to the commemoration of the various scenes in the Mystery-Drama of the life of the Christ, which in itself is typical of the life of every Christian, as Origen pointed put."

There are four principal stages in that progress. Those who have studied these things from another point of view know that in oriental religions those four stages are called the four great Initiatipns. These appear in Christianity also, but the terms are different. The first of them is symbolized by the Birth of the Christ — that first great Initiation which is the birth of the man into the great White Brotherhood, which is always called in the gospels the kingdom of heaven. We cannot understand those gospels, we cannot make coherent or reasonable sense out of them, if we take the kingdom of heaven to mean the heaven-world after death. If we understand that the kingdom of heaven is a great living community, we shall see why it is difficult for the rich man to enter into it; we shall see how all the promises made about it are literally accurate; otherwise they make no sense at all.

In that first Initiation also the birth of the ChristPrinciple takes place in the man, for the Monad and the ego — the spirit and the soul, to use the Christian terms — become one for a wonderful moment.

The second of those great stages is symbolized by the Baptism of our Lord. We must not confuse this with the baptism which brings every child into the Church of Christ. It is that of which John the Baptist spoke when he said: "I indeed baptize you with water, but He that cometh after me shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with Fire." There is an outpouring from the Initiator to the candidate at that second great ceremony which has indeed all the appearance of a baptism of fire.

The Transfiguration is the representation of the third of these great Initiations, for in that truly the Monad, the spirit, transfigures the soul, and the soul in its turn transfigures the body down here — the personality, as we often call it. All these are wonderfully apt illustrations. When we come to the fourth, we find what many people think a truly terrible Initiation, though surely it is also one of the greatest glory; for then the candidate suffers what is imaged by the Crucifixion, though if he passes the test successfully it is always followed by the victory of the Resurrection.

If we read the account of the life of any mystic who has passed through that wonderful stage we shall notice how closely these events follow one another, and how truly the Christian story mirrors them. We shall see that there is usually some small earthly triumph like that of the Christ on Palm Sunday, and after that there is always the combination of enemies to disgrace the candidate; there is always the misunderstanding and the contumely thrown upon him, and then after all that comes the great and glorious resurrection out of that suffering into life eternal — eternal as regards this world at any rate, for the man who has taken that step need never again be reborn here on earth.

Then after that comes the fifth step — the last of all, that which takes the man out of humanity and makes him a superman. That is aptly symbolized by the Ascension from earth to heaven, and the downpouring of the Holy Spirit comes upon him and upon others in consequence of that his ascent —all truly as it is mirrored in the gospel story.

There is an immense amount of detail into which I cannot pretend to go now; but it will be seen that the symbolical interpretation is at least coherent, reasonable and defensible. There is no argument against it, whereas the contention that the account is historical can be overthrown at every point; therefore those who pin their faith to that historical idea must shut their eyes to a vast amount of what they cannot but know to be the truth, whereas those who are prepared to accept the higher and inner meaning will find that their faith is founded upon a rock.

In drawing up the calendar for the Liberal Catholic Church we have ventured upon a slight rearrangement of some of the minor festivals in order to bring forth this inner meaning somewhat more clearly. At Christmas, with all the world, we celebrate the Birth of the Christ. There is no special festival appointed in the ordinary Catholic calendar as an anniversary of the Baptism of our Lord, though many have celebrated it along with the Epiphany. We therefore have ventured to set apart another day for this celebration, somewhat later than the Epiphany; and because the Transfiguration (symbolizing the third Initiation) comes out of its due place when kept on the 6th August, we have also transferred that, and we keep it between the Baptism (which represents the second Initiation) and Easter (which represents the fourth). So once more these four stages will be restored in our calendar to a coherent whole, and put in the right Qrder.

There is no tradition in the Church as to the actual anniversary of either the Baptism or the Transfiguration. The custom of celebrating the latter on the 6th August was introduced at a comparatively late date; I think the first time we find it mentioned is in the year 850 A.D., and even then it seems to have been only locally observed. It was not until the year 1456 that its extension to the universal Church was decreed in commemoration of a great victory gained over the Turks on that day. So as the original date is not known, we have not, I think, committed any great breach of propriety in putting these celebrations in their true order, so that the symbolism shall be clear to our brethren.

Many of the events described as having happened in the last life of the Christ are commemorated on the days when they are actually supposed to have occurred, although on this subject there has been in ecclesiastical history considerable difference of opinion. The great group of festivals whose dates are determined by that of Easter fall on different days of the month in different years; but they are all decided with reference to the Paschal full moon, just as the old Jewish Passover used to be.

The other group of festivals, being dependent upon Christmas, have fixed dates — the Annunciation on March 25th, Christmas Day itself, the festival of the Epiphany twelve days later, and the Presentation of Christ in the temple, which is commonly called Candlemas Day. There is little reason to suppose that any of these dates are historically correct, but they are arranged to be consistent one with another.

CHAPTER I

ADVENT

With us, as with the Churches of Rome and of England, Advent Sunday is what may be called the ecclesiastical New Year's Day. The Holy Eastern Church (the Church of Greece and of Russia) observes the same custom, but she clings to the unrevised calendar, and so she begins all her commemorations twelve days later than we do.

The first great feast of the Church's year is that of the Birth of the Christ, which corresponds to, and teaches us of, the first of the great Initiations. But the Church in her wisdom has ordered that for each of her greater festivals there shall be a certain time of preparation, and consequently before the feast of Christmas we have the season of Advent — which has indeed a double aspect, but its first is that of a time of preparation for the due celebration of Christmas.

It is not a mere fashion of speech to say that we ought during the season of Advent to be making ourselves ready for that festival. Christmas is not only a birthday, not only a commemoration of the nativity of our Lord; it is also a time of the special outpouring of spiritual force. Such great festivals as Easter and Christmas, in the rejoicing connected with which we all join so eagerly when they come round, are definitely occasions for what is commonly called the shedding of grace from on high; and in order that we may be able to avail ourselves to the full of such an outpouring, it is well that we should take advantage of the season of adjustment. We receive more if we prepare ourselves properly; so we should accustom ourselves during Advent to think daily of the Coming of the Lord, and of the Initiation which it typifies.

The four Sundays in Advent are devoted by the mystics of the Inner School of Christianity to the contemplation of the four qualifications for the first Initiation — Discrimination, Desirelessness, Good Conduct and Love; but no trace of that arrangement remains in the modern Church services, unless it be the old custom of substituting rose for violet as the colour for the third Sunday. As is explained in our Liturgy (and more fully in the first book of this series, The Science of the Sacraments) the Church utilizes different rates of vibration, which show themselves to our eyes as colours, to assist in impressing upon her members the various lessons to be learnt successively in the course of her year. In the preparation-periods (Advent, Lent and the vigils of Saints' Days) the colour chosen as most helpful is purple, because of its actinic, piercing and cleansing properties. Approximately in the middle of Advent and of Lent we find a Sunday on which rose is prescribed; and for this various reasons have been suggested. Through certain curious misunderstandings these preparatory periods came to be considered as penitential and sorrowful, and it was supposed that the rose-coloured Sunday was introduced as a kind of mitigation of grief — a momentary relief in the midst of austerities. A truer theory is that, as the one efficient motive for our attempt at selfpurification is our love for God, this dramatic change of colour in the midst of the season is intended to remind us of that deep and true affection which must underlie and permeate every effort that we make, if there is to be any hope of its permanent success. At least this much remains of the joyousness which should characterize the whole season; for it is not by fruitlessly mourning over our sins, but by earnestly resolving to forsake them, that we can fit ourselves to make the best use of the glorious festival which is approaching.

The Church Catholic has always recognized the dual nature of the Advent season — that it is a preparation for the next Coming of the Christ, as well as for the celebration of His birth in His last life on earth. The Churches of Rome and England speak of that second Coming, and adjure their people to be ready for it; and yet there is a vast amount of serious misunderstanding about it. In the Christian scriptures it is entangled with the idea of the end of the world, so that people who look for the second Coming of the Christ generally think of it as also the end of all the order that they know, and so most of them fear it. In the sermons and hymns connected with the Coming there still lingers a flavour of fearful anticipation of an awful descent from the physical sky, acccompanied by appalling meteorological phenomena. The general attitude is far too much that expressed in some of the Advent hymns which such people sing:

    The ungodly, filled with guilty fears,
      Behold his wrath prevailing;
    In woe they rise, but all their tears
      And sighs are unavailing.

And they talk of them as "deeply wailing," "in deep abasement bending," and so on. Now it should be very clearly understood that all this sort of thing is not only silly, but definitely wicked and blasphemous; and the men who teach such a horrible misrepresentation of true Christian doctrine undertake a very serious responsibility, for surely to slander our heavenly Father and to degrade His children's conception of Him is a crime of no small magnitude. There is of course nothing whatever of that sort among true mystics, who have always known that God is Love, and have never feared any manifestation of His Presence, for they know that whether they see Him or not He is always with them even unto the end of the age.

All fear of God comes from a misunderstanding. The Coming of Christ is indeed connected with an end ; it is not the end of the world, but the end of an age or dispensation. The Greek word is aion, which is the same as aeon in English; and just as Christ said two thousand years ago that the dispensation of the Jewish law had come to an end — because He had come to found a new dispensation, that of the gospel — so will the gospel dispensation come to an end when He comes again and founds yet another. He will give the same great teaching: the teaching must be the same, for there is only one Truth, though perhaps it may be put a little more clearly for us now, because we know a little more. It will be promulgated in some fresh dress, perhaps, with some beauty of expression which will be exactly suited to us in this present day; there will be some statement of it which will appeal to a large number of people.

It will certainly be the same, because it has appeared in all the existing faiths. They have differed much, in their method of presenting it, but they all agree absolutely in the life which they ask their followers to live. We find considerable difference between the external teachings of Christianity, Buddhism, Hinduism, and Muhammadanism ; but if we examine the good men of any one of those religions and enquire into their daily practice, we shall find that they are all leading precisely the same life — that they all agree as to the virtues a good man must possess, and they all agree as to the evils he must avoid. They all tell us that a man must be charitable, truthful, kindly, honourable, helpful to the poor; they all tell us that a man who is hard and grasping and cruel, a man who is untruthful and dishonourable, is making no progress and has no chance of success until he changes his ways. As practical people we must recognize that the things of real importance in any religion are not the vague metaphysical speculations on matters of which no one can really know anything for certain, for these can have no influence upon our conduct ; the important things are the precepts which affect our daily lives, which make us this kind of man or that kind of man in our relations with our fellow-men. Those precepts are the same in all existing religions; they will be the same in the new teaching, whatever it may be.

Perhaps we may go a little further than that in predicting what He will teach, because there are some other avenues of information open to us. One of these is the study of the previous teachings which He has given. Students will remember that before this World-Teacher took up the office it was held by the Lord Gautama, Whom men call the Buddha. His especial title was the Lord of Wisdom. He gave many teachings, but they all centred round the idea that knowledge meant salvation — that the evils of the world came from ignorance, and that through ignorance men were led into desire, and by that into all kinds of sins and sorrows; but that if the ignorance of man was dispelled, and he came into possession of perfect knowledge, he would thereby come to the perfect life, and to the perfect attitude towards all men and all circumstances, and so would escape from the wheel of birth and death.

Our present World-Teacher bears the name Maitreya, which means kindliness or compassion, and just as the Lord Buddha was called the Lord of Wisdom, so is the Lord Maitreya called the Lord of Love or of Compassion. The great central truth which He will emphasize is that the evils of the world come from the lack of love and brotherliness — that if man will learn to love and to adopt the brotherly attitude, all evil will pass away and the golden age will dawn upon us. Not immediately— we cannot hope for that; but at least men will begin to see for themselves, and to understand how much more is to be gained along that line than the other. We may see how prominently that doctrine came forward in His previous lives.

Twice He has appeared — as Krishna in the Indian plains, and as Christ amid the hills of Palestine. In. the incarnation as Krishna the great feature was always love; the child Krishna drew round Him people who felt for him the deepest, the most intense affection. Even now the religion which He founded perpetuates itself in the most touching devotion, the most wonderful attraction to the child Krishna. All over the south of India many millions of followers still worship Him, and it is of the essence of their worship to feel for him the deepest affection — a devotion more touching, more intense, I think, than any that I have seen even in the monastic communities of Christianity.

Again in His birth in Palestine, love was the central feature of His teaching. He said: "This new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another as I have loved you." He asked that His disciples might all be one in Him even as He was one with the Father. His closest disciple, St. John, insisted most strongly upon the same idea: "He that loveth not knoweth not God, for God is love." St. John lived to a great age (over a hundred), and when in the days of extreme old age and feebleness he could no longer deliver long sermons, as he was carried about in a chair among the younger people, his word to them always was: "Little children, love one another." So we have some evidence from the two previous births of the great World-Teacher that the central idea of love will dominate His utterances now.

In a certain little book called At the Feet of the Master we have some teaching given to a young Indian pupil (whom I knew well) by one of the Masters of the Wisdom who is Himself a disciple of the World-Teacher. Its especial object is to set forth in the simplest possible form the qualifications required for Initiation. There is no mystery as to those qualifications, for they are given in books belonging to various religions, and are well known to all who make a study of such subjects. In these different presentations, however, there is room for considerable variety, both in the method of teaching and in the translation of some of the technical terms employed. In this little book to which I have referred we get the presentation of those qualifications by one who is so close a follower of the WorldTeacher that we may feel sure that it is practically His presentation. That book clearly does not contain the whole of what He will teach, but we may certainly take it that there is nothing in it of which He disapproves. In reading it we cannot fail to be struck by the fact that it is most strongly permeated with this same spirit of love. The final qualification, the intense desire for union with the Supreme, is given in that book as Love, on the ground that the Supreme with "Whom the man wishes to be one is Himself Love ; and therefore he who wishes to join with Him must first develop that love within himself. I strongly recommend that little book to the notice of every member of our Church; it will be found in many ways a most useful manual, for it shows us clearly in how many ways our present methods of life fall far short of that high ideal of love.

In reading the Christian bible we should, I think, remember that its language is largely symbolical. I do not mean to say that all the writers knew exactly what it meant. I do not think they did. I think they also were in many cases deceived, because they put into the mouth of the Christ words which represent Him as expecting to come back quite shortly. Again and again He is made to state: "There are many standing here who will not pass away until I come again," whereas we know that two thousand years have passed since then.

That idea of the destruction of the world is a mistake. It may be said: "All the Christian world takes it literally; how do we know that it is a mistake?" In this Liberal Catholic Church we worship and we follow the living Christ. Not a Christ of two thousand years ago only, but a Christ Who lives and inspires His Church now; in this day also He has His prophets who know and declare His Will, and those who know have told us that He will come again even as He has said, and that that Coming will be soon now, as we count earthly time. It will indeed begin a new era for those who are willing to receive it. It will be a great change, but it will be a mental and a moral change. He spoke, in that previous visit of His, of the signs which should foretell His second Coming. If we read what is written, we shall see that the great war has been one of those signs; and we can also see that much will be possible in the way of reconstruction after it which would not have been practicable before. Let it be clearly in our minds that He comes not to destroy the world, but to teach us, even as He came before. He comes to reign indeed, but He comes to reign in our hearts, for His kingdom is not of this world.

How shall we prepare ourselves then for this His Coming? Chiefly by unselfishness and by service to others for Him and in His Name. The virtues of devotion, of steadfastness and of gentleness need developing in us all, as is stated clearly by the Order of the Star in the East, a Society which exists to prepare the way for His second Coming, to help us to fit ourselves to receive Him, and so far as may be to help to make others ready as well.

This time, as indeed He is said to have foretold, there will be many who will not heed, many who will be wrapped up in business and in pleasure. He quotes the legendary story of Noah, that men were going on with their work and their play and paying no attention to the prophecies, and the flood came suddenly and destroyed them all. This is the legend of the sinking of Atlantis — a historical fact, though it did not occur exactly as described in the traditions. Christ is reported to have said that just as it was then, so it will be when the Son of Man shall come again. The people will be fully occupied with their business and pleasure, and not thinking in the least of Him, and so they will not know Him; they will not identify Him or recognize Him. We at least must be wiser than that, we who are trying to study the inner meaning of all these things; we must make ourselves ready to receive Him; and for those who will so prepare themselves, be sure that a wonderful and a glorious time will come.

We hardly realize, perhaps, how stupendous is the privilege of being born at this time, of having been able to take part (for we all have taken part in one way or another, I hope and believe) in the great war of right against wrong, which has so recently drawn to a close; and even more than that, we who live now may hope to see the second Coming of the Christ among us. And think what that should mean to us, if we recognize Him.

    For He Whom now we trust in
      Shall then be seen and known,
    And they who know and serve Him
      Shall have Him for their own.

They shall know the truth and the truth shall make them free, for in His service there is perfect freedom. And He has told us that whosoever does service unto one of the least of His brethren, does it unto Him. That must be our preparation.

For us who know the nearness of His Coming, Advent is a time not of fear, but of joyous recollection and of still more joyous anticipation. Our attitude is well expressed in the ancient hymn:

    Rejoice! rejoice! Emmanuel
    Shall come to thee, O Israel.

At the season of Advent we should have much in our minds the necessity of the quality of discrimination in making ready for our own Initiation, and also for the Coming of the Lord. It would be useful for us to think carefully how that great quality can be displayed in our efforts to spread the knowledge of that near Coming — how in our work of preparation we can display the wisdom of the serpent as well as the harmlesisness of the dove. "With these thoughts in our minds "well may we rejoice and sing," as our hymn tells us, for "we are waiting with a hope that cannot fail." Brethren, the Coming of the Lord draweth nigh; yea, it is even at the doors. Already the dawn is lightening; soon shall be the rising of the sun.

    Coming! in the opening East
      Herald brightness slowly swells;
    Coming! O my glorious Priest,
      Hear we not Thy golden bells?

CHAPTER II

CHRISTMAS

Christmas is one of the greatest of the festivals of the Church; it is perhaps surpassed only by Easter, for on this day we celebrate the birth of the Sun-God, as on that day we celebrate His victory over the powers of darkness. Christianity, like all the other religions, was founded in the northern hemisphere, and consequently its festivals all fall at; inappropriate times so far as the southern hemisphere is concerned. The rebirth of the Sun-God after the eclipse of winter was celebrated on the first day which was definitely longer both in the morning and in the evening, immediately after the winter solstice, the point at which the earth turns in its circuit round the sun, and begins to pass away from him instead of drawing towards him. In the same way the victory of the Sun-God over the powers of darkness was celebrated as soon as the equinox had passed — as soon as the day was definitely longer than the night. These festivals of the Sun-God had been kept for thousands of years before the birth of Jesus, so that it was quite natural for the early Church to adopt their dates for its celebrations.

The actual date of the birth of Jesus is not known, but from various indications it seems probable that it was some time in the spring. The 25th of December was, however, selected fairly early in ecclesiastical history, because it coincided with that great Sun-festival, and it was naturally convenient to take advantage of what was already a public holiday. Those who do not recognize the symbolical meaning of the life of the Christ naturally suppose all these ecclesiastical commemorations to be merely historical; but we, who are trying to delve a little deeper into the truths of nature, shall none the less find it interesting to look for other and deeper significations as well.

What are the points of which the great Christmas celebration reminds the Liberal Catholic? It seems to me that there are no less than seven of these points, and I will try to explain them one by one.

1. We must certainly not ignore the historic aspect of the day, even though we know that it is not an actual anniversary. In precisely the same manner, it is agreed that a certain convenient day shall be celebrated each year as the birthday of King George, although it may not be the anniversary of his coming into the world in this incarnation; but it would be both foolish and improper to decline to observe it on that account. Unquestionably, therefore, we are called upon on Christmas Day to look back to that descent of the great disciple Jesus, and to thank him for it, and for all that has since come to the world in consequence of it. It was he who lent his body to the Great Teacher in order that He might come and found His religion and preach His gospel upon earth.

That may seem a new and strange idea to some, but it is one quite commonly understood by those who grasp the facts of reincarnation — those who know something of the might and the power and the dignity of the Great One Whom we call the World-Teacher. We know that it would not be economy for Him, it would not be a good use of His stupendous power, that He should occupy a human body through all the period of its birth and growth, the earlier stages of its life. Therefore one of His disciples takes charge of all that for Him, and He steps into the full-grown and fully-prepared body when He is ready to do so, and uses it for the purpose for which alone He takes it over. For He Himself lives habitually upon a plane far higher, and carries on there a work so magnificent, so beyond our conception, that it is little use for us to try to grasp it, except in the merest outline.

In this particular case an advanced disciple of the Lord Christ took birth in the year 105 B.C. among the descendants of King David, as a son of Joseph and Mary; and to him was given the name of Jesus. He remained in charge of that body until it was about thirty years of age, and then handed it over to the Christ, "Who occupied it for the three years of His earthly ministry. The disciple Jesus was reborn as Apollonius of Tyana just about the date usually assigned to the beginning of the Christian era; and a thousand years later he appeared as the great teacher Kamanujacharya, who left so deep an impression upon Indian thought. In due course he received the reward of his self-sacrifice, and attained the Asekha Initiation, thereby becoming one of the Masters of the Wisdom. We reverence Him now, therefore, no longer as the disciple, but the Master Jesus.

Therefore it is well that we should sing our Christmas hymns and carols, and perpetuate the beautiful traditions which have gathered round the birth of the Master Jesus. We do not necessarily thereby assert our belief in their historical accuracy; for indeed the same lovely legends hang round other births of the World- Teacher, and it is perhaps difficult to suppose that they were literally true on all these various occasions. But we certainly need not doubt that each such birth is a great occasion, and is attended with unusual phenomena upon higher planes, which may have been seen by some at least of those who were at that period living in physical bodies.

2. We call to mind upon this occasion the descent of the Second Person of the Blessed Trinity into matter; and, just as in the smaller cycle we owe deep thankfulness to our great World-Teacher for His descent into a human body in order to help and to guide us, so should we also feel profound gratitude to the great Solar Deity Himself for that willing limitation of His power and His glory which has brought us into existence.

There are many in the world who might say that they feel no gratitude for having been brought into existence — that life is to them more sorrow than joy, and if they could have been consulted they would have preferred not to be. But any who speak thus are thinking only of the very little that they see and know of the great cycle of life; they know nothing whatever of the glory that lies before us; they have realized nothing of the mighty plan of which they are an infinitesimal part. Those of us who are happy enough to know a little of that glorious design cannot but be filled with vivid though humble admiration for it; for we see beyond our present inefficiency to the wonder and the beauty of the future. We realize something of the splendid scheme in which His marvellous love is manifested, and when we catch even a glimpse of that, we cannot but feel strongly moved and full of gratitude that we should have been permitted so wondrous a privilege as that of taking a part, however small, in the glory and the perfection that is to be. Let us show that gratitude, then, by endeavouring to comprehend His manifestation so far as we may, and intelligently to co-operate with it. 3. Yet again, as we have already said, Christmas Day reminds us of that first of the great Initiations, of which it is a symbol in the carefully arranged syllabus of the Church's Year. We should think, then, what this first Initiation means for us — how it is indeed a second birth — a birth into the great White Brotherhood. During the preparatory season of Advent we have been considering the qualifications needed for it; now we should contemplate the thing itself and its results. We should realize how one who has taken that step has become safe for ever, and therefore may truly look upon the great World-Teacher as his Saviour — though not indeed from the mediaeval myth of everlasting torture. There is no such thing as that in nature, and there never has been; the whole thing is a frightful bogy which men have allowed to grow up and to terrify them. There is no eternal damnation to be saved from; the world needs a saviour from such a horrible idea, but not from the fact, because it is not a fact at all. Such a delusion is part of the error and the ignorance which causes all the trouble and all the suffering which we see around us. Verily is the World-Teacher a Saviour, not only for the Initiate, but for all of us; for it is His instruction which saves us from our own error and ignorance, and therefore from much of sorrow and of suffering, which are the necessary consequences of that ignorance.

Not only should we look forward to the time when this wonderful Initiation shall be ours, but we should also make this an occasion of grateful rejoicing that for some it has already come. We thank God for His saints — for the elevation which they have given to humanity, not only by the encouragement of the example which they set before us, but by the actual uplift to the whole which each one of them has given in his own attainment. This uplift is a reality, by no means to be despised or forgotten; humanity is a brotherhood, little as most men recognize that fact, and the unity is so real that whenever one nian attains, all the rest are definitely helped and raised by that attainment. So that should be another aspect of our Christmas joy.

I know that it comes as a shock to many good and earnest Christians to be told that the gospel story is not history, but truly myth. When one says that, people think at once: "You are taking away from us our Jesus, our Saviour. You are denying His historic existence." We are not denying that at all, but we do hold that the gospel history as it is now written is not, and furthermore was never intended to be, an actual account of the life of that great World-Teacher, the Christ. We know but little of His true life-story. It seems certain that some parts of it were interwoven into this myth; it seems certain that some at least of the sayings which in the gospels are credited to the Lord Christ were really spoken by Him. But it is a matter of equal certainty that some of the others were not; and it is also plain to anyone who understands the subject, and has read something of comparative religion, that the whole account is cast in that allegorical form intentionally — that it represents not the life-history of any one man, but the spiritual history of every true follower of the Christ. It is obviously not a history, but a drama — a collection of episodes, arranged as though for presentation on a stage.

This idea, which seems so new to many, is not really new at all. It was quite manifest to the greatest of the Church Fathers. It is strange only to us, and it is strange because we inherit a great deal of the darkness of the Middle Ages. In these days we can no longer give blind faith to something which our reason shows us to be an impossibility. We need to comprehend what this beautiful story means, and it is quite easy to follow that. Origen, the greatest of the early Christian writers, explains the thing most lucidly. He says that there were in his time (and there certainly are now) two kinds of Christians. There were those whom he called the believers in " somatic " Christianity, which means bodily or physical Christianity. He makes it perfectly clear that by that expression he means those who believe in the story as a story, and he says of their doctrine: "What better could you have for the instruction of the masses?" But he makes it abundantly evident that the spiritual Christian holds an altogether higher form of Christianity, in which he understands the inner meaning of all these allegories. Christ in each of His parables is represented to have told a story which had within it two inner meanings. First there was the purely physical tale for children, which described (for example) how the sower went forth to sow; secondly there was an intellectual explanation, whereby the seed is the word of God, the sower is the preacher, and the different sorts of ground are the different kinds of hearts on which it falls. Thirdly, there is always an inner and a still more spiritual signification which is not given out, which in this particular case is the pouring out of the divine life in many planes and into many worlds.

Origen holds that, just as the words of the Christ bear an inner interpretation, so does the whole narrative of the Christ bear an inner interpretation, that can be seen only if we study its similarity to the other presentations of the same great allegory. He insists that all this takes place not in the fleeting world of shadows, but in the eternal counsels of the Most High. He says that so long as we understand the universal truths which are revealed by the story, the story itself is of no importance. Its meaning is clear, it describes the progress which lies before every Christian man. People who study these matters deeply are sometimes disturbed to find the close resemblance which exists between the Christian legend and those of other Saviours long before — pagan Christs, as Robertson calls Theo in his book on the subject. It is true that all the details of the life of the Christ are to be paralleled by anecdotes of other Teachers Who were unquestionably far older in time than He, so that either we must accept the idea of a wholesale plagiarism by the Christian writers from those earlier authors, or else we must suppose that all of them are trying to set forth the same great truth, but are setting it forth each in his own way. That explanation is not without confirmation even in the existing scriptures, for St. Paul himself is made to say in how many ways, and at how many different times revelations have been made. He writes to the Hebrews: "God Who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time past unto our fathers by the prophets " (meaning not those few local Jewish prophets, but all the great prophetai, the great teachers of the world) "hath in these last days spoken unto us by His Son/1

We want to get our people to take a more rational view of religion than many of our fellow Christians take to-day. They are unfortunately obsessed with the idea that Christianity is the only religion, and that all the others are just a set of heathen superstitions. That is a most illiterate and ignorant attitude to take, and it shows that they know nothing whatever of these other religions. That should not be so. Religious people should take an interest in all presentations of religion. It happens (it is not a mere happening, for it is a matter of our destiny and our deserts) that we have been born into this race, and into a country where the recognized religion is Christianity. That is not a mere chance. We were born there because we deserved to be; because the best opportunity for us is to come into this particular set of environments ; but other people in every way as good as ourselves, and as far advanced as ourselves, are born into quite a different environment, and we must try to realize that to them their religion is just as natural as ours is to us. We probably cannot imagine that we could have been born into any other religion, just as a man feels that he never could have taken birth as a woman, or a woman as a man. But that is of course mere illusion; the soul has neither sex nor race, and we take these different births according to what is best for our development.

All religions alike are statements of the same great truth, and each of those religions has a special variant or facet of that truth to present to us. There is the religion of Hinduism, a religion at present professed by three hundred millions of people, and professed by their ancestors (for one must be born into this religion in order to belong to it) back through long periods of high civilization — a civilization that was already at its height when our forefathers, the ancient Britons, were running about naked in the woods and painting themselves blue. Their religion has for its greatest feature the idea of duty — dharma, they call it. Their one remedy for every ill is: "Let a man do his duty; each man is born in a particular place with a particular duty to do, let him do it"; and they dwell very greatly on the immanence of God. In Ancient Egypt another mighty civilization was running its course at the same time. The great central point of its religion was what we should now call science — that is to say the mastery of nature by knowing all about it; and the Egyptians laid the foundation of a great deal of our modern science. The very name by which they called their country, Khem, gave the name to our science of chemistry.

In ancient Persia they had another great religion, Zoroastrianism. It has sometimes been called sun-worship, but we must not be misled by a popular title of that sort, for no one ever worshipped the sun as such, but the sun as a manifestation of the great power behind it. Their chief idea was purity. They wished above all things else to emphasize purity in thought and word and act. Coming further down the stream of time there was the religion of Greece, the main point of which was beauty. The endeavour of the Greeks was to impress upon people beauty in their lives, beauty in their surroundings, in everything they had about them; beauty of character as well as of form and colour. Then came Rome with its great religion, enforcing the idea of law and discipline, insisting always upon duty to the community — a very fine idea. Then there was the teaching of the Buddha; in His great religion He also preaches the law, but not quite in the same sense. When He speaks of the law He means not man-made law at all, but the order of nature, and He says that all the mistakes which men make come from their ignorance. If they will only study the divine scheme and live accordingly, all will go well.

Then comes our, religion of Christianity ; its great central idea is self -sacrifice — the thought that the greatest among us shall be he who serveth best. You know the highest title of a bishop is Servi^s servorum Dei, "Servant of the servants of God/' That is the great point that Christianity has to emphasize. All these religions come at different times, each when its particular quality is most needed in the world. Surely any one can see that that is a far grander conception than the orthodox theory that all these other religions are feeble or evil superstitions, and that the only people who can be saved are those who happen to come into touch with the Christian faith. This latter seems a strange and ridiculous idea, but it is of a piece with the self-conceit which made men think that this tiny planet is the centre of the universe; that this particular little speck of mud is the hub of creation, and that all these tremendous stars and suns are circling round it; that God Himself came down to live and die upon it in order that its comparatively insignificant population might be saved, and that all the other populations of those far more magnificent worlds are left to take care of themselves.

No one need be in the least distressed to find the same truths taught in other religions. It is what we should expect, as soon as we get rid of this amazing exclusive idea that we are the only people who ever heard the truth — that of all the countless millions of men who have ever lived on earth, the few generations from the time of Jesus are the only men to whom God thought it worth while to make any revelation of Himself at all. If we can put aside that astounding unreasonableness we shall realize that there have been many presentations of the truth, which are all alike in many respects, though each is put in the way most suitable for the people at the time. Therefore, instead of being alarmed at these likenesses, let us welcome them; let us compare all the different accounts, and so learn from them more of the truth that lies behind them all.

We need never fear that we shall lose anything by understanding the inner meaning of the gospel story; on the contrary we shall gain much. In this Liberal Catholic Church we lay no injunction upon men as to what they shall believe. We put before them the Creed as worthy of study, and we say to them that they may interpret it literally, if they like. That is their affair. Or they may take the higher symbolical interpretation whinh we offer them if they prefer it. Whatever they may elect to believe, there can be no harm at least in their knowing the inner meaning, so that they may have it before their minds, in order that if they hear the historical theory overthrown by argument, they may understand that there is another and more spiritual interpretation to which exception cannot be taken. We shall keep our feasts better, and not worse, if we have a fuller and clearer understanding of all that they mean. By all means let those who wish to do so hold to the physical record; but let them remember also that behind that earthly story there is always a heavenly meaning. We may think of it as existing for the sake of the heavenly meaning if we like, which is what I myself believe as regarding it. Or we may accept it as having actually taken place, and suppose that this inner and beautiful explanation has been invented to fit it. It does not matter. It is for each man alone to 'decide what form of faith he will hold with regard to all this, so long as he understands the high, spiritual, glorious meaning, and so long as he tries to live up to all that it involves.

4. Through the Advent season the Church looks forward to the next Coming of our Lord; at Christmas that expectation culminates, and her celebration is one of gratitude not only for His last Coming, but also for favours yet to come. We cannot but think of that greater Christmas when He shall again appear among us on the physical plane in a body that can be seen of all. For He Himself, the very same Great One Who took the body of Jesus two thousand years ago, is ready soon to come again, and to bless the world once more with His teaching and His help, as He blessed it before. The voice which spake as never man spake will speak again in the ears of men now living, and at no great distance of time from the present day. Those of us who hold that belief are naturally eager to do what we can to prepare ourselves and others for His Coming, and to try to spread the news of it in the outer world.

It is not for us to criticize, or even to marvel at, the arrangements made when last He came to earth; but it can hardly be unseemly for us to note that little was then done (perhaps little could be done) in the way of preparation in the outer world. There seems to have been a general expectation of the coming of some Great One, as there is now; but there was only one John the Baptist, so far as we know. This time the conditions in the world are in every way so different that preparation may be usefully attempted on a somewhat wider scale, and every one who, having examined the evidence, sees reason to expect the near Coming of the Lord should do what he can to prepare His way and make His paths straight.

The idea of the second Coming of Christ takes on a different aspect when we realize that the world is steadily evolving and that the Christ is a mighty Official Who is in charge of its religious thought, and either comes Himself or sends one of His pupils as a teacher whenever He thinks that such a visit will help it in its evolution. I know how strange that idea must seem to many people who have been brought up in the belief that there is only one religion in the world — that there are a few heathen superstitions somewhere or other in far-off corners of the earth, but that our only duty with regard to them is to try to convert the poor heathen from the error of their ways, and to give them the truth which has been revealed to us alone. I suppose it has never occurred to some people that it would be rather strange that we, of all the people in all ages, alone should have a monopoly of the truth. There have been mighty sages, great saints, magnificent thinkers, who had not this truth, which has been given exclusively to a small handful of us. They apparently had not these advantages, and they seem to have done remarkably well without them. Surely it is more reasonable to believe that there are many great religions in the world, and that they are all equally paths which lead up the same great mountain of truth.

I mean that all the great religions come from the same central source; that this World-Teacher and His Department are responsible for all of them. I do not say that He is responsible for the vagaries of the individual believer. Men have corrupted and distorted His teaching ; that is true of every religion. That these faiths as originally founded are all statements of the same eternal truth, we can see for ourselves, if we will take the trouble to study comparative religion. Unfortunately we inherit the ignorance of the period called the dark ages in Europe — a time in which few people seem to have known anything worth knowing; and as far as religious matters are concerned, many people have not tried yet to come up out of that darkness. We do realize that to practise the so-called science of the Middle Ages would be ridiculous. We know a great deal more now; we know that to live according to the hygiene of the Middle Ages would lay us open to awful epidemics; but most people have not realized that the religion of the Middle Ages was equally defective in its statement. Our mediaeval ancestors did not understand Christianity; they took it in the narrowest and most bigoted way, whereas it is capable of an interpretation more useful, wider and more tolerant in every way. And that is the interpretation we try to put upon it to-day.

In one of the Indian Scriptures, the World-Teacher is represented as saying that whenever the world falls into great sorrow and misery, whenever it seems that unbelief and evil are triumphant, then He comes to present the eternal truth in some new way which shall to some extent take the place of His previous statements, which have been distorted. This may seem strange to some, but let us take it for the moment and think of it — that all these various presentations differ because they are offered to different people at different ages of the world, at different stages of the progress of human thought. Let us grasp that idea, and we shall see that no one of them can be expected to be eternal —that, on the contrary, everyone of them must in time become more or less corrupted, more or less distorted; and therefore, just because it is cor-rupted, unsuited for the needs of the world. The world is advancing, and a new presentation from time to time is an absolute necessity. What was appropriate for people two thousand years ago cannot be fully suited for us in the present day. A vast deal more is known on many subjects than was known then, and any statement of truth that was fitted for people then will need considerable revision and addition before it can be made suitable for us. On the other hand, a presentation of the truth such as would now be absolutely suitable for us, would have been insanity, would have been utterly inappropriate, at that time. It may well be that it is thought that a restatement of the same great truths would be beneficial and helpful.

We can see if we look around us that our churches are not being attended by the people as a whole. We hear that in the Middle Ages everyone took part in the devotional spirit of the time, but most assuredly that is not so now. Not a tenth part of the population of any so-called Christian country takes part in its religious observances; I suppose the proportion is probably much less than that. That does mean (and it is no use trying to avoid the issue) that the religion as now stated has lost its hold on the bulk of the population. When that is the case, one way of dealing with the difficulty might well be a restatement; we should call it, perhaps, a new religion. That is not a good phrase, because it implies much more than the mere restatement of the same truths.

The truths of religion are eternal truths; they may be distorted; they may be misrepresented — they certainly have been; but the fundamental basis of all the religions represents eternal verity, which cannot be changed, though it may be more fully stated; it may be put in some new way, which may appeal to the modern spirit. But the great facts are the same. I do not mean that we must believe in any particular name, or in any particular ceremony, but in the real basic facts that in order to progress a man must be a good man, that he must live a high and pure and noble life, that he must practise the virtues which every religion in the world without exception recommends to him — charity, nobility, self-control, temperance, patience, and love.

I have already referred to the weird entanglement of the teaching of the Christ with unscientific ideas about the end of the world. It is curious to see how ready the ignorant still are to create bugbears for themselves. There was an announcement in the newspapers only a few months ago that the end of the world might be expected on a certain day, because the planets were in a certain position. It is absolutely amazing that sane people could be induced to believe such nonsense. The planets have been in a similar position many thousands of times, and it has not been the end of this world or of any other. Men do not seem to understand how insignificant is the combined weight of those planets in comparison with the weight of the sun; they might about as sensibly expect that a cart could be upset because a fly settled on the rim of the wheel. Popular ignorance is a very strange thing. We make our children's lives a burden to them with what is miscalled education, and yet this is the practical result of it all.

Men sometimes say, "The second Coming of the Christ has been known, and people have been looking forward to it for a long time; why should we be specially preparing for it now?" There are many reasons for that — some of them external reasons, and some which are much more private and intimate. There is a new race developing in the world. We ought to know something about that here in Australasia, because this is one of the countries in which this new race is showing itself. If we look round us we shall see that there are still many people who are distinctively English or Scotch or Irish, who belong to the old races; but we shall also see many, especially among the children and young people, who do not belong to any of these ; we shall see a new race springing up which is not English, or Scotch, or Irish, but Australian.

In America there are even more people in proportion who do not belong to any of the races which go to make up that great nation, but are distinctly men with new qualities and recognizably new physical appearance. It is an intellectual race; it is a strong-willed race; the study of it is wonderfully interesting. Now all through history wherever a new race has arisen there has been a new religion to fit it. It is probable that there will be a new religion to fit this race, and if it is to do good it must arise tolerably soon.

We are a great civilization — at least we think ourselves so — and yet there is a vast amount of misery in the world; we are badly in need of some sort of change. There is unrest everywhere; it would seem that the system on which we have been relying for some centuries is breaking down all round us. Something new is wanted; new developments are turning up in all directions. The spread of science is wonderful; the advance in knowledge within recent years is very great — in chemistry, in mechanics, in everything. There is a new time coming. The old civilization has done its work, and we want, we must have, something new.

There is an expectation of the Coming of the Christ all over the world. All these religions of which I spoke, so far as they are active, are expecting Him. The Hindus look forward to the Kalki Avatara; the Buddhists to-day are awaiting the Lord Maitreya, which is their name for the great World-Teacher Whom we call the Christ, Among the Muhammadans, when a pretender started up not long ago in Africa, he gained an immense following because he proclaimed himself to be the Imam Mahdi, the Saviour for whom they wait. He was not, but many believed it. In Zoroastrianism there is also a tradition of a great One Who is to come. Among ourselves there are the Seventh-Day Adventists and other similar societies; and we have in our midst the Order of the Star in the East, which is trying to prepare its members (and also outsiders) for the near Coming of the WorldTeacher.

Why is there such a wide expectation of the Coming of the Lord? We who study the inner side of things know that it is the reflection in the minds of men of the knowledge of greater Beings, the knowledge of Adepts and Angels. They know that the Christ is coming soon, and Their knowledge is in the mental atmosphere; it communicates itself to our mental bodies by sympathetic vibration, and it gives us this great expectation. It is the reflection of the thoughts of the higher Beings Who know.

Assuredly the need of the world is great. None can deny that; and we may remember in a scripture which is older than any of ours, the World-Teacher is represented as saying: ''When evil triumphs, then I come to help." It is not that we do not know what we ought to do. We know the principles, of right and wrong as well as anyone, but we do not apply them. It is not new truth that we want, but new inspiration to practise the old truth. There is a great desire to help among many people. That is one of the signs of the times; but they do not know how to begin. Each tries his own little panacea, and perhaps it succeeds a little, but on the whole it fails. They will welcome the idea of one who knows, and who can teach.

Some of us have been studying this thing, and similar things, for many years. I myself have been working at this inner side of things under definite instruction for thirty-seven years, and on my own account twenty years before that. Some of us in the course of such study have been led to the feet of those Great Ones who do know about these things, those who are in charge of the world's evolution; therefore we can with confidence repeat that which we hear from them, that the Coming of the Lord draweth nigh, that it will not be long now, as we measure earthly time, before He shall appear amongst us. We cannot pretend to tell to a year or two, because what is told to us is always to this effect: "When the earth is ready by your exertions. I shall come;" and it must be soon, because the need is so great. That, of course, is no proof to others. So far as they know, we may be dreaming; we may be altogether in error in what we think; but I would suggest that at least we give direct testimony, which is comparatively rare in religious matters, and so what we say constitutes a piece of evidence that ought to be taken into account.

Look round the world and see how wide-spread is the expectation; see how great is the need; see the new race waiting for the religion which shall fit it as it grows up. There are plenty of indications to enable us to understand that this Advent is not far away.* Although what we see and know for ourselves is no proof to any one else, we do our duty at any rate in announcing the Coming.

* See 4 World Expectant, by A. E. Woflehouse.

Let us then make as determined an effort as we can to get ready for the Christ; let us try to purify ourselves, try to make ourselves what we wish to be if He is to come; and let us help to prepare His way. Long ago, when He came in Judaea, there was one John the Baptist. Let us, everyone of us according to his power and opportunity, be John the Baptists. This time let Him come not with one herald only; let there be thousands of us trying to prepare the way of the Lord and to make His paths straight. For when the world is ready He will come. So let us join in the work of the Order of the Star in the East or of the Liberal Catholic Church; let each work in his own way for a better time, a time of brotherhood and love, for that is what the Christ will preach to us when He comes. Let us cultivate brotherhood and love in order that we may be ready to receive Him, in order that we may profit by what He has to tell us, and to offer our hearts, our hands, our speech, to help Him in the work He is to do.

5. We must not forget that there is another aspect of the Coming of the Christ — the coming within the heart of each individual, the development of the Christ-principle within us." A great and glorious mystery underlies all this — the wonderful, and yet most intimate, connection between the Second Person of the Ever-Blessed Trinity and the great WorldTeacher, and in turn the link joining both of These to that Christ-principle within man to which we often give the name of intuition. Yet indeed it means much more than intuition; it means the wisdom that knows, not by process of reasoning but by utter inner certainty. That development must come to every man. That Christ-principle is in every one of us; it can be awakened — it is being awakened among us even now, and as it unfolds we realize the true brotherhood of man, because we realize the Fatherhood of God. We come to know that our separate consciousness is nothing but an illusion — that we are one in Him. First, one with all who know Him and love Him; and then secondly, by a still greater extension, with all the world, whether as yet they know it or not. To touch that wonderful consciousness, to realize the Christ within us, is not so impossible, for it is being done even now by some. Gleams of its glory sometimes manifest themselves; flashes of wonderful peace and uplifting, so that at least for a few moments we know. And those of us to whom these glimpses have come can never forget them; however much afterwards doubt and uncertainty, sorrow and even despair may overwhelm us, we have known, and our hearts, our hands, our speech, to help Him in the work He is to do.

5. We must not forget that there is another aspect of the Coming of the Christ — the coming within the heart of each individual, the development of the Christ-principle within us." A great and glorious mystery underlies all this — the wonderful, and yet most intimate, connection between the Second Person of the Ever-Blessed Trinity and the great WorldTeacher, and in turn the link joining both of These to that Christ-principle within man to which we often give the name of intuition. Yet indeed it means much more than intuition; it means the wisdom that knows, not by process of reasoning but by utter inner certainty. That development must come to every man. That Christ-principle is in every one of us; it can be awakened — it is being awakened among us even now, and as it unfolds we realize the true brotherhood of man, because we realize the Fatherhood of God. We come to know that our separate consciousness is nothing but an illusion — that we are one in Him. First, one with all who know Him and love Him; and then secondly, by a still greater extension, with all the world, whether as yet they know it or not. To touch that wonderful consciousness, to realize the Christ within us, is not so impossible, for it is being done even now by some. Gleams of its glory sometimes manifest themselves; flashes of wonderful peace and uplifting, so that at least for a few moments we know. And those of us to whom these glimpses have come can never forget them; however much afterwards doubt and uncertainty, sorrow and even despair may overwhelm us, we have known, and therefore inside we still know, and that certainty nothing can shake.

True, most who touch that glory for a moment touch it unconsciously, not knowing what it is, not realizing the intensity of its splendour, not seeing whither it would lead them. They know that they have moments of ecstasy, moments in which the love of God reaches them in a way which they never imagined before, a greater intensity of bliss which touches them, which is far beyond all earthly things. But as we progress that certainty will come oftener and more fully, and will remain with us longer, until at last that higher consciousness will be ours in perpetuity — Christ in us and we in Him. For there are those who set themselves deliberately to gain this glory and this splendour, who endeavour to deal with it scientifically, and so to let knowledge grow more and more until they consciously enter into the glory and the fullness of the Christ Himself, realizing the God in man, because they themselves are consciously part of that God. That is the birth of Christ within the heart of man, and assuredly it is a very real thing. Truly in that sense we may say that Christ is the Saviour of the World, for it is through that experience only that man can attain that which God means him to attain.

To develop oneself intentionally as described above is the shortest and the most direct route to such awakening. I do not say it is the only route. One can gain that elevation by intense intellectual absorption, by long-continued hard work and the practice of virtue. But the shortest, the most direct method of attaining the highest rapidly is the deliberate awakening of the Christ within the human heart. For this and for its glorious possibility we also give thanks at the holy season of Christmas.

How shall we know whether we are on the way to this glorious consummation? What can we do to bring nearer that supreme bliss? If Christ is to be born within our hearts, we must be living the life of the Christ; we must show forth His spirit to those around us. And the Christ-spirit is first of all love~ and brotherhood. The man in whom it is developing will assuredly exhibit love, kindliness, tolerance, comprehension — a general growth all round, an increase of the quality which for want of a better word we often call bigness. We speak of a man as great when he is of wide tolerance, of open heart, great in his character; and just those qualities are the result of the unfolding of this Christprinciple.

They show themselves in daily life in various ways; prominently in that the man begins to take the best view of people and of things instead of the worst, that he makes a practice of putting the best construction possible upon the words and actions of his fellow-men instead of (as I am afraid we so often do) the worst possible. We shall find that constantly when we think of the actions of a man, we attribute them to some weakness or defect in him ; we assign to him a motive of some sort. If we were in a position (most of us are not) to get behind the thought of that man, arid find out really why he did or said a certain thing, we should find that our attribution of motive was in most cases absolutely incorrect and unjust, that his reason for doing what he did was much more creditable than we were ready to suppose, and that he had some thought in his mind which never even occurred to us. This assigning of a motive is a habit; we all find ourselves doing it, until by steady practice and care we learn not to do it, but to attribute to another nothing but the highest and the best thoughts. In doing that we may sometimes be deceived, but it is better a thousand times to form a wrong estimate in that direction, than once to do a man the injustice of attributing to him a lower motive and a lower plane of thought than that which is really his. A man in whom this wondrous unfoldment is beginning abandons all unnecessary criticism, and learns to see the good in everything, even when it needs a little search to find it, when it is not as obvious as the more objectionable characteristics.

Another infallible sign of the growth of the Christ-principle in a man is unselfishness, for that is the key to all, the central virtue which gives birth to all the others.

We can see at once what a change it would make in the world if feelings of that kind were widely spread. How different everything would be if each man thought first of others — if each man were willing to take the wider and more tolerant view, and to attribute the best possible motives instead of always evil ones! Perhaps we cannot hope that any large number of people will attain to that level just at present, for it would obviously need the evolution of thousands of years ; yet there is a factor coming into the case for which a large allowance will have to be made by those who try to forecast the future ; and that is the actual physical coming of the Christ, the World-Teacher, to be among us and help us once more. We cannot tell to what extent His presence may affect the people. An influence so tremendous as His; the persuasive power of the voice that spake as never man spake; the facts that His teaching will be simultaneously reported all over the world, and that He Himself will probably visit all the countries of the world in succession; all these considerations show us that here is a factor whose influence is incalculable. He may well precipitate the time when an unselfish attitude will become far more general than it now seems reasonable to hope.

It may be that the world in general is not so far as we think from that higher and grander attitude. It is undoubtedly full of bitter selfishness and unreason, as may be clearly seen from the prevalence of strikes, struggles and disorder everywhere. Most of the words and deeds of the average man are selfish; and yet that average man — a perfectly ordinary specimen — has again and again been found capable in a great emergency of suddenly rising to heights of heroism of which we might have supposed him to foe quite incapable. A man, apparently just like his fellows, a rough and common sort of man, will deliberately sacrifice his life to save a comrade. That shows that there are the seeds of right feeling in every man, and that, given the right power applied at the right time and in the right way, the ordinary man may be raised to great heights.

In the great war thousands of men came forward voluntarily to risk their lives, to fight for an ideal, for the maintenance of a treaty, because our country's word was pledged. Those who fought had nothing to do with the pledging of that word, but they were willing to devote themselves to the uttermost to redeem their country's guarantee. That has a hopeful side; that is a good augury for the future; for the man who is willing to give his life for an ideal now may very likely be willing to spend his life in following an ideal when he comes back in another incarnation. So the world at large may be more ready than we think to respond to the mighty influence which the great Teacher brings.

Few can form any conception of what that influence will be. Only those who have come into contact with some of the great Adepts can estimate the power of the Master of Masters; and even they can only faintly adumbrate the tremendous radiation of love and of strength which will come from that mighty Personality. It may well be that in His presence what would otherwise be hopeless and impossible may be found to be easy of achievement; it may be that under that marvellous influence men will wake up and bring their common sense to bear upon the various problems which come before them. There is nothing too great to hope from such a power as that.

All this separateness is an illusion; we are one in Christ; and to know and realize that fully is to awaken the Christ within us. Remember how it is written in the scripture: "Christ in you, the hope of glory." It is precisely the presence of that Christ-principle within us that brings the hope of glory to every human soul. Without that we should be lost indeed; that is the true Christ, belief in Whom is necessary for salvation — not salvation from a mythical hell, but from the wheel of ever-recurring birth and death.

To escape from that wheel is to avoid the broad and easy road that leads to death (and birth and death and birth over and over again) and to take the narrow and more difficult path which leads to the kingdom of heaven, where death is a ridiculous impossibility — where life, and the increase of life and power and love, and all that that means, constitute the only possible future before the sons of men. The way of escape lies in this development.

    Though Christ a thousand times in Bethlehem foe born,
    But not within thyself, thy soul shall be forlorn.

6. All great festivals have another aspect, and this one has it among the rest — perhaps even this has it pre-eminently. They are all special channels of force — occasions upon which a greater outpouring of divine power takes place — greater, I mean, than in ordinary times. Let not this thought seem strange to us; let us not imagine it as a limitation of God's Omnipotence. For God Himself works by means, and takes advantage of opportunities; and this wondrous creation of His is so utterly one in Him, so mystically inter-related, that as the stars move through their courses there are certain times when certain energies are more readily available than at others — when the bridges are clear, the channels are open; and Christmas is such a time. These special occasions, these great festivals, are not mere commemorations; they indicate definite actions on the part of the Living Christ Who is the Head of His Church. All the members of the Church are members of Christ, and are definitely linked to Him through baptism and through confirmation, and still more through the most holy Sacrament of His Love; so they are always to some extent under His in-fluence. But He has ordained certain methods for the pouring down of His influence upon His Church, and the greatest of all is the Sacrament of the Holy Eucharist. Therefore there are special times and special conditions under which the outpouring is more definitely available. Always, everyone of us is in link with the Christ, and yet we all know that we are more closely linked with Him — that the link is more alive, is more vivid — when we come to His Church, when we kneel before His very Presence in the Bread and Wine which He has chosen to be His vehicle, through which He represents Himself to our outward senses.

Just in the same way as that is a more intimate Presence than the Presence which is always with us, so have we an extraordinary outpouring of power at certain times and seasons. There is definitely a greater, a more universally assimilable outpouring on such days as Christmas, Easter, the Ascension, Whitsunday, Trinity Sunday; each of these has its own special character. Such a day as this great Feast of Christmas is a real opportunity for each one of us, for there is a stronger and more definite outflow of divine power then, just because the whole world is more prepared to receive it,

It is well for the student to cast aside old preconceptions and prejudices and make a determined effort to understand the principle which underlies the whole of this question of the effusion of helpful force from higher planes. That principle is simple and scientific, but most people have to rearrange their thought upon religious matters before they can grasp it. Stupendous as is the force available for the spiritual helping of man, it is nevertheless an absolute and immutable law that it shall never be wasted — that it shall be used to the best advantage. This holds good at all levels. In the most wonderful Sacrament of the Holy Eucharist we have the privilege of calling in great Angels to help, and the central point of the whole ceremony, the Consecration, is the act of our Lord Himself through the Angel of the Presence; yet the whole of this tremendous outpouring is made dependent upon our initiative. It is the fact that a priest is ready to celebrate which gives the opportunity, which sets all this marvellous celestial machinery in motion, which makes it (if we may say so with the deepest reverence) " worth while" for our Lord and for His Angels to do this particular thing in this particular way. The Lord Christ is a great official of the Hierarchy, and as such He is always pouring out those wonderful forces at His own high level.

It is an axiom that the highest work which any one can do is especially and essentially the work appointed for him. For example, those of us who can work in the astral world spend our nights in trying to do the work of invisible helpers, to help people in sorrow and suffering. We want to do whatever we can. Unquestionably one of our Masters or one of the great saints could do far more in such work than any of us can do, and yet he would not do it, because he can do a hundred-fold more effective work on higher planes, and the fact that he can do that work marks him out for it, so that for him to do this lower work would be a waste of force.

If a man takes the trouble to qualify himself to do research work in connection with a great univer-sity, it would obviously be a waste of his force to set him to reap a field or mend a road, even though he would probably do it better and more intelligently than the people to whom that work is usually assigned; but it is obviously best for the community as a whole that each man should be doing his highest work.

That holds good all the way through. For the World-Teacher, "Who can wield powers beyond those of any other of the Masters or saints, it would be a waste of time to do the work which they are habitually doing, because He can do something far grander still. Therefore it is best that each Master and saint should do the work he can do, and that above him the World-Teacher should be doing His best work, and down here we should be doing such work as at our level we can do. There is only one point of view that the Great Ones hold with regard to work, and that is that the greatest possible amount of it shall be done under the most economical conditions, so that the power may go further.

The Lord would not turn aside from the higher work He is doing, in order to do anything that we can do, unless it were made, profitable from the point of view of the progress of the whole that He should do that. If the world is to be helped, certain work must be done at the lower levels as well as at the higher. For Him to force His power through from above into the world below would mean a great outlay of His energy, and economically the result produced would not be "worth His while," if we may Venture to put it so. He could do far more with the same amount of force at the higher level; but if we provide the channels for Him, it is "worth His while" to do the work through us, because a little force from above can do a great deal down here if the channel is provided for it.

When the congregation of a church provides the love, devotion and enthusiasm with which the wonderful eucharistic edifice can be built, it is worth the while of the great Angels to come down and help, because the material is already given. It would not be worth their while, so closely are these things balanced, if they had to provide the material on the lower plane, for that would be to them a great trouble, because a descent into physical matter would be necessary; it would not be an economical use of their power. But when we provide the material, it is "worth their while" to intensify it; after they have raised and intensified it, it then becomes "worth the while" of the Christ to make a tremendous outpouring of His power; but it would not be economical for Him to do this unless these conditions had been provided.

What I have written above about the eucharistic service is equally true of the special outpouring of divine energy at these great festivals. On the higher level the divine force is ever streaming forth and doing its appointed work ; when men are to an unusual degree ready to take advantage of it, it becomes "worth while" to transmute a large amount of this force that it may be applicable to the lower level. So once more the initiative is left with us; when we provide the conditions, advantage is at once taken of them.

The sun is always shining, but he is not always visible to us on earth, because earth-made clouds get in the way and shut him out. Just so the divine Christ is always pouring forth, but we sometimes make our own clouds, which get in the way and prevent that divine power from influencing our lives for the time. That is not the fault of the Christ, but our fault. And so in His lovingkindness — because there are so many of His people who are not yet able to touch these higher planes, far above all earthly clouds, where the sunlight of His Presence is always vivid — He has arranged times when it shall be easier for men to draw closer to Him. If we but knew it, we are all close to Him always, but still we feel it more at certain times than at others.

When any one man is in a condition of great love, great devotion, great happiness, he sends up what is very literally a spire of devotion, and that breaks through into the higher planes, and there comes down upon that man a response of love and blessing commensurate with his own feeling. Some people might say, not understanding: "But why should not such an outpouring come always?'' Because he is not always ready to receive it. I suppose that it might have been so arranged in nature that the sun should be strong enough to lick up and drive away any possible cloud. I do not know that it would have been a good thing for agriculture if that had been so; at any rate, that is not the plan upon which the world is working. The clouds do not keep back the whole of the life, the strength, that is being poured out by the sun; they keep back just a part of it, and a larger part of his light, but not the force which keeps his worlds alive; and the same is true of his great prototype, the Lord Himself. When a man breaks through his selfmade clouds he is able to receive this downpouring of divine blessing; otherwise he would not be able to receive it, it would have to be forced upon him, and that is not God's way of dealing with man. He never forces Himself upon us. There is very good reason for that; it would not help our evolution if He did. That is the law, and if we want to receive His grace we must lay ourselves open to its influence. An individual can do that to some extent; but when thousands upon thousands of people all combine to do it, we see at once how great an opportunity there is for this downpouring of what we must call Grace, Strength, Power and Love, which is always streaming forth.

Christmas is a time when that opportunity is near and vivid; but the extent to which we can avail ourselves of it depends upon several factors. First, and most of all, it depends upon how far the Christmas spirit has entered our hearts. If we are filled with the peace and goodwill of Christmas, the goodwill of the Christ Himself can reach our hearts.

It depends also upon how far we have used the season of Advent as a special time of preparation. There are certain virtues which we should have tried to cultivate within us, certain vices we should have repressed; if this has been done, we are the more ready to take advantage of this great seasonal outpouring of definite power. Be sure that this power is a real thing. What we sometimes call the grace of God is just as definite and as real a force as electricity or steam; but it is dealing with higher matter. To say that is not to materialize a spiritual conception; it is rather an effort to bring a great truth down to our comprehension, to make it clear and real to us. We are material creatures; we still have bodies; not only the physical body which all see, but the emotional body and the mental body. But all of those are material. There is a spirit which lies behind it all — a spirit which none can see, which none can touch; but that is far above us yet, and when we can realize it perfectly, we shall be hid with Christ in God. But now, and in the meantime, we live in bodies; and it is through and by means of these bodies that we must be affected. Therefore the Christ Himself pours down influence veiled in material forms in order that it may help us. Otherwise it would pass above us and beyond us, and to us would be as though it were not. And so He sets apart certain times such as Christmas in which this outpouring may descend to the lower level and more readily influence us; He sets apart certain places — such as His churches — in which we may be more readily, more easily reached.

Any man, anywhere, may touch the Christ-Spirit just in so far as the soul within him (which is the real man) is attuned to that Christ-Spirit. But the specially consecrated, specially magnetized places which are set apart for His service make that work easier, for their influence is intended to bring us into a condition in which we can receive that help from on high. We have only to think it over with common sense and with reason, and we shall see that that must be so. A church is one of the places set apart for His service; Christmas is one of those occasions on which it is easier for all to draw nigh to Him.

Let us try to realize, then, that Christmas Day is a personal opportunity for each one of us; that we are not merely repeating an old formula when we sing: "Unto us a Child is born; unto us a Son is given.'' There is actually a definite outpouring of that divine force for each member of His Church, and the extent to which we can partake of it, the amount that we may gain from it, is limited only by our power to receive. Christ is unlimited, and His power overshines the whole world. What we each can gain from this is our affair; it is in our own hands. Let us open our hearts to the spirit of the Christ-Child, to the spirit of Christmas, and that Christ- Child will fill our hearts with His joy and His peace.

In addition to this, we must not lose sight of the fact that the preparation is made not by ourselves alone on the physical plane, for on all great festivals vaster crowds of Angels gather round our altars, and the outpouring is assuredly greater in consequence. Each Sunday Angels cluster round every celebration, for a certain section of that glorious Order has taken it as its specific task to dispense this force in connection with the Christian Church; but on such days as Christmas, Easter, Ascension Day or Pentecost, not only that section is in action, but for the moment almost all their Angel brethren concentrate themselves on this special branch of the work. Naturally that is true not of the Christian religion only, but of other religions as well; for example, on the great Wesak Festival of the Buddhists it may be said that almost the entire heavenly host is temporarily concentrated upon work in connection with that. So it will be seen that there is reason for the insistence of our Church on the importance of observing the ecclesiastical seasons, and reason also for the special request made in the prayer-book of the Church of England that all its people shall communicate at least three times every year, of which Easter shall be one.

7. Finally, there is an aspect of Christmas as a season of rejoicing, apart from its religious side — if anything connected with it can ever be apart from that. This is the aspect which is so prominent in the works of Charles Dickens, who paints it always as the feast of good fellowship. The English-speaking world owes much to Dickens for the lessons he taught about Christmas.

It is a time of peace to men of goodwill, and surely at that time we all try to be men of goodwill; and it is remarkable how nearly a great many people succeed. It is a wonderful thing, this Christmas spirit, this real feeling of brotherhood that is spread abroad on that day. There is a greater goodwill, a greater kindliness and comradeship, a truer brotherhood on Christmas Day than all the rest of the year. It should not be for Christmas only, of course; we should have that feeling always; but since we are overwhelmed by the noise and tumult of the world, since we cannot yet all of us feel that noble Christmas heartiness all the while, it is at least a good thing that there should be one day when all the world agrees to feel it, when every man tries to come as near as he can to the brotherhood which ought to exist all the year round. Assuredly it is well, too, that we should endeavour to impart our joy to others — that a goodly custom should have sprung up whereby on Christmas Day the poor and the needy are helped towards the realization of the great brotherhood of humanity, for our Christmas joy can be perfect only in so far as we share it with others less fortunately circumstanced than ourselves.

So let Christmas enter into our hearts and into our souls, and let us try, everyone of us, to feel then what the Angels sang so long ago — first "glory to God in the highest," and then no less "peace on earth and goodwill to all men."

CHAPTER III

NEW YEAR'S DAY

There is no especial reason why January 1st should be chosen as the beginning of a year, but it is the day usually adopted by all the nations who have inherited the great Roman civilization. The Hindus and Buddhists choose quite a different day; and, in fact, one day may be taken just as well as another, because the earth is steadily moving in its orbit round the sun all the time, and in the endless line of that ellipse there is no reason to choose one point as a beginning more than any other — unless it were perhaps the aphelion, the point at which the earth, having reached its greatest distance from the sun, turns and begins its approach.

New Year's Day is not, strictly speaking, an ecclesiastical festival; for us in the Church Advent Sunday is the beginning of our year, and January 1st is merely what is called the octave of Christmas, for we do not commemorate the alleged circumcision. The outpouring of force in connection with some of our festivals is so great that we find that it cannot be adequately dealt with, and that full advantage cannot be taken of it, in one day; and so the Church lias adopted the plan of devoting a week to such feasts. She carries on the celebration until the eighth day, which is called the octave, and any day during that week is described as within the octave.

In mediaeval times all business stopped for eachof the great ecclesiastical festivals, and the day was given up entirely to observing it in what was con-sidered a proper manner. There are still a few countries in the world where this is done, but they are hardly in the forefront as far as material wealth and modern progress are concerned. Most nations are far too hurried, too material, too breathless in the excitement of the mad race after wealth, to stop their whole machinery at irregular intervals in this way; but they have grudgingly admitted the necessity of a weekly pause in their activities, which in Christian lands comes on Sunday; and it is often only on that day that people have leisure to attend a religious service. The plan of continuing the celebration of an important day for a week ensures that at least one Sunday shall occur within the sphere of its influence, so that an opportunity of sharing to some extent in its special downpouring shall be offered to every member of the Church. So on New Year's Day our thoughts are still turned to the great festival of Christmas, and all that it means to us.

Nevertheless, the Church is always ready to take up any occasion in civil life in which her people are rightly and innocently interested, and to give it her blessing. Therefore, on the first day of a new year we gather together in the house of God to pay Him worship, and to take part in the great Sacrament which He has ordained. Surely there is no better way to begin the new year than this. I know well that many people in our great cities have to work hard, that holidays are comparatively rare for them, and that when they get one they need rest, change and fresh air; yet for all that, I think they do well who gather in church to begin the new year by dedicating it to our Lord. It is well to spare a little time from our enjoyment in order that we may come before Him and express our thankfulness for the past, our confidence for the future.

Most people who think at all seriously of the new year regard it as an occasion for the making of good resolutions — for a sort of mental and moral stocktaking; they look back upon their resolves at the beginning of the previous year, and usually have to note with regret that there has been a certain gap between promise and performance. Such contemplation is no doubt salutary; but it is useless to waste time in vain lamentation or repentance. Note the error by all means, but do not worry over it; one of our great Masters has said that the only repentance which is worth anything at all is the resolve not to do it again.

In making our resolutions for the new year we as Liberal Catholics (and therefore, I hope, earnest students of the divine plan) must inevitably fix our eyes upon the final goal that is set before us. We all know that it is our duty to progress; we know that we are intended to grow better as we grow older. There is a mighty scheme of evolution of which we are a part. We all came forth from God, and to God we must all return. People sometimes wonder why, if that be so, all this striving for development is necessary; if we were divine in the beginning, can we be more than divine at the end? Is there any real progress? There is, for we came forth from God, as it were, a nebulosity; we came forth from Him mere sparks — albeit divine sparks; we have to return to Him as great and glorious lights, as veritable suns radiating His glory on all around us, shedding help and blessing on those who come in our way. We go back again to the same God from Whom we came forth, but we return to Him at an infinitely higher level.

If we could imagine (it may be true for anything we know) any scheme by which each cell in our body could personally evolve and become a man — become the soul of a man — we should not say that in attaining humanity that cell had made no progress, because it had been a human cell to start with. We should feel that it had made the most astounding, the most enormous progress. That is only an analogy, and a rough one ; but there is a certain amount of truth in it, for there is quite that much of difference between what we have been and what we shall be, and we may well have been cells in some divine garment in some embodiment or manifestation.

To Him we must return verily as gods ourselves. The object of the whole of this strange and mighty evolution was expressed by the Gnostics in this way: "God," they said, "is Love; but love itself cannot be made perfect unless there are those upon whom it can be lavished, and by whom it may be returned; therefore God Himself can express Himself more fully, more perfectly, when we rise to the Divine, when He can pour out the splendid flood of His love upon us, and we in our smaller way can definitely, clearly return it.

Our progress is a necessity to the perfection of the evolution of this great system of which we form a part; therefore we ought definitely to be making some advancement both in knowledge and in character each year as it goes by. Most of us are business people, and our time is fully occupied; but we must not for a moment think that because of that there is no opportunity for us to evolve. In the course of that business we are constantly meeting various people, and our attitude towards them is of the greatest importance. We can treat them well, kindly, gently and good-naturedly, or we can treat them otherwise — carelessly, selfishly, without due regard to their rights and feelings. It is certain that as we do one or the other, so shall we ourselves improve or deteriorate, as the case may be. It is in daily life that we have the greatest opportunity of changing our character. Many a man has confessed to me that he has a bad temper, regretting it, but regarding it apparently as a fact in nature which he could not alter. He seemed to think of it as some kind of dangerous animal which he had to keep and make the best he could of it. No doubt there are men who have a bad temper, who are readily irritable; but that is not because it is natural to man to have a bad temper, but because in their case the astral or emotional body likes excitement and disturbance, and is quite willing to take it in that way. That astral body has a life of its own, and for its own purposes it eggs the man on to irritability. Not that it is malignant, and wants to harm him; it is doubtful whether it even knows of his existence; but because it desires to stir up its surroundings in order that it may have the pleasurable excitement of rapid and stormy vibrations. If we find that we are irritable, it means that in past lives we have yielded ourselves to this emotion; we have not stood strongly against it and realized that it was our business to control it. It is never too late to change, however; because in other lives we did not quite understand our power to dominate the emotion, the thing has a certain hold (perhaps a very strong hold) on us; but there is no reason why we should not at once begin to try to grip it.

We shall have to do it some time or other, for until we have done so we can never attain that which God means us to attain. If we have cultivated a certain habit (a bad habit, perhaps) for the last twenty thousand years or so during several past lives, it will take some time to break that habit, because of the impetus behind it. Yet we should go to work at it at once. We may fail; we may fall a hundred times, but we should remember that there is exactly the same reason for getting up and going on at the end of the hundredth failure as there was at the beginning. Since the reason remains exactly the same, as sensible people we must get up and go on. It is useless to sit down and say that we have tried so many times, and we cannot do it. We have to do it; others have done it, and so can we; it is simply a question of determination and perseverance.

Let me explain why it is certain that we can succeed in the end. However much force a habit has generated, it must be a finite amount of force. Though it has had a long time in which to gain that strength, it cannot have gained an infinite amount. What we have to fight, therefore, is a certain definite amount of force. We do not know how much of it remains; there may still be a good deal left, or our efforts to conquer it may have so far reduced it that we may be on the very brink of success. We are in the position of a person trying to dig his way out of prison — he never knows at what moment the last stroke of his pick may open out the way for him and give him the promise of freedom, but he knows that that moment must come if he goes on long enough. This conquest of evil is perfectly possible. It can be done, and it will be done. It is only a question of how long we are going to let it take us.

What resolutions then shall we set before ourselves for the new year? It seems a suggestive fact that, as I have already said, New Year's Day is the octave of Christmas; so one resolution might well be that we will try to carry on through the whole of the year the Christmas spirit.

If during Christmas we have been more kindly, more ready to help, more friendly, more ready to see the best and not the worst in everything, let us go on taking the same attitude all the year around. Let us have the same feelings, the same uplifting, the same realization. I think it often seems to us that we are quite willing to be brotherly, but that other men will not meet us half-way. If we find that so,- it does not alter our duty; it takes two people to make a quarrel, so we should continue our brotherly feeling; if the other poor man does not understand and return it, that is exclusively his business. It is unfortunate for him, but really it does not harm us, as we shall see if we only think clearly about it.

We should always remember that no harm can come to us except from ourselves. Other people may say offensive things to us or about us; they may attack us in various ways; but, after all, that need not make any difference to our feelings unless we like to let it. What are words? Only vibrations of the air. If we never heard of what the other man has said, we should not be in the least disturbed about it; but because we happen to hear of it, we excite ourselves unduly and feel offended and hurt. Think of the facts as they really are. Somebody slanders you; he has acted the devil's part, for the devil is the accuser of the brethren; he has spewed forth his drop of venom, and done his filthy little best to poison God's sweet air; but if you hear nothing of it you go serenely on your way; his despicable crime leaves you entirely unaffected. But if you hear of the falsehood you are disturbed. The villain has done no more now than he had before, when you were quite at ease; the change is in yourself, and the mistake you have made is that you allow yourself to mind — to remember and to brood over a foul thing which should be forgotten.

The Lord Buddha taught that Right Memory is one of the steps of the Noble Eightfold Path which leads to bliss. Each of these steps has many interpretations at different levels of thought; but of this one the straightforward meaning is that we should know what to remember and what to forget. The theory is that one should be able to control one's memory — to remember that which is pleasant and useful, and to forget that which is useless and undesirable. Really to forget; to let it be just as though the wicked libel had never been spoken, or as though we had never heard it. That is a hard thing to do — not because the real self, the soul, wishes to remember such an abomination, but because the astral body, one of the vehicles we are supposed to have controlled, likes a little excitement and tries to keep a stormy atmosphere. We must recognize that fact, look down calmly on that restive vehicle, and say: "No, I shall not allow you to upset my arrangements. I intend to keep the New Year as free from your little interferences as I can. I decline to be annoyed because an ignorant man has made atrocious and foolish statements." Ignorant men are always making foolish statements all the world over, and it does not matter in the least — except to them, for it makes exceedingly evil karma for them.

Let us make this New Year one long Christmas, so that the Christ may truly be born in our hearts, so that we may never again feel un-Christlike. That is a high ideal to set before us, and of course sometimes we shall forget. But let us go on again and persevere until we can do it. It is supposed to be a characteristic of our race that we stick doggedly to anything we have undertaken until we carry it through. Let us show that character in religion as well as in the battle-field, in sport, and in commerce. Let us show it in the real life that lies behind, as well as in that of the outer world.

Through the year which is opening before us let us earnestly try to take everything in the happiest and kindest spirit — to have no quarrels, to take no offence, to make it a year of true brotherliness. The majority of people in the present day live in an atmosphere of perpetual misunderstanding of others, because they are always attributing motives to people for what they do and say. It is a great mistake to go through life supposing that all those round us are constantly thinking of us, and that everything which they do or say is definitely calculated in some way with relation to us. The fact is quite different; each person is usually looking upon his surroundings from his own point of view, and his thoughts, words and actions are likely to be, if not exactly selfish, at any rate self-centred. Wherefore, in attributing motives to him, we often do him grievous wrong; and we do it because of the fact that we have cultivated the discriminating mind at the expense of the sympathizing and synthesizing sense, the intuitive wisdom. The discriminating intellect is a fine thing in its way, and I am not suggesting that we have too much of it, or should fail to develop it; but we often miscalculate its scope, and so exaggerate its value that we leave no room for faculties unquestionably higher.

Let us then make it our rule to watch for points of agreement rather than of disagreement, to look for pearls rather than for flaws; to try to find in our brethren qualities which we like, rather than to overemphasize those which we happen to dislike. Let us make each year a year of fraternity, of sympathy and of mutual understanding, for in doing that we shall go far towards ensuring that it shall be a happy year, not only for ourselves, but for others around us.

There seems even more than the usual need for such resolutions at this period of the world's history. Four New Years have recently passed in which we felt but little joy, for we were in the throes of a great world-war, and there was not much to encourage our firm faith that all in the end must be well. There were those of us who knew what the end would be, but to those who did not know the outlook must often have seemed dark and uncertain. Suddenly, dramatically, came the end of that strife; that alone is something for which we may well be thankful, and when we see what happened, then we surely have good reason not only for thankfulness to our Lord, but for confidence in Him that the future also shall go well; that though sometimes dark clouds may rise, yet the sunlight of His glory will in the end always triumph over them, and progress will be made, because that is His will, and in the long run His will is done on earth even as it is in heaven. So we have good reason to look forward with confidence and with happiness.

Yet remember, if a glorious victory was won, if we received in that way great encouragement, a serious responsibility was thereby thrown upon us. There is to-day an unequalled opportunity for rearrangement in many different ways. These years immediately before us begin a new age — an age, I hope, in which men will learn to be less petty and less selfish, to take a wider view, to act not for self alone (nor even for that magnified self which is called a union, a body of people all belonging to one trade or one business) but for the community as a whole; not for one class or party, but for all.

Much of the success of that future, much of the extent to which men take this opportunity that comes before us, will depend upon the way in which we think and speak and act. Perhaps few of us have any direct influence; that is in the hands of politicians and party leaders. But those people, after all, are chosen by us among others. We have something to say in the matter, and we can use our influence, not only by vote but by word and by deed, by persuasion and by example. We can learn unselfishness for ourselves, and the very fact that we live it (so far as we can) as well as preach it, will give our words great weight with those around us. Every one of us has someone who looks up to him or to her — someone who takes note of what he or she says or does. Whatever influence we have, let us most certainly try during these years of reconstruction to use it on the side of brotherhood, to use it for mutual understanding and mutual esteem.

There are thousands of different points of view; there are people whose ideas, on almost any subject of which we can think, are quite different from our own. The natural instinct of humanity seems to be to distrust such people and to dislike them; and with the ignorant and the uneducated such a feeling of mistrust and dislike often absolutely increases into hate. Thus arises the horrible thing we call class-consciousness, when one class is set in mad. indiscriminating prejudice against another class. We cannot doubt that there has been reason in the past for one class to distrust the other; history shows it. Each has been selfish, each has worked only for itself. Let us try how far it may be possible now to co-operate, and to induce others to work towards co-operation.

The system of disunion, the system of perpetual quarrelling and misunderstanding and suspicion has been tried through centuries, and it has not been a conspicuous success. Let us try now the plan of trusting one another a little more — of giving every man credit for the good intention which we know that we ourselves have. Every man means well on the whole; he thinks first of himself certainly — though often it is of the wife and the children as well as himself — but if facts are put before him he is usually willing to act sensibly and reasonably. In many cases the facts are not put before him; he gets only a distortion of the truth, and because of that he acquires a strong conviction that everyone is setting his hand against him, or is trying to put upon him in some way or other, and the result is that out of all this confusion, suspicion and hatred are born, and agreement becomes almost impossible. Let us strive, so far as we can, towards unity and mutual progress. If only men understood one another there would be few differences of this savage nature. Of course, as now, there would be plenty of differences of opinion, but not differences leading to distrust. A great Frenchman once said: "Tout comprendre, c'est tout pardonner." "To understand all is to forgive all." We see a man doing something which to us seems very dreadful, utterly improper, dangerous perhaps to ourselves or to others. If we understood exactly why that man did that thing, if we could see the action as he sees it, we might not in the least agree with him, but at least we should understand him, and we should forgive him. It is because we will not take the trouble to understand one another that so much suffering comes in this world. If each one would try to put himself in the other man's place, as indeed a brother should do, then we should be able to make allowance. We might still differ from him, but we should meet and discuss matters with him in a totally different spirit — in a spirit which would make compromise possible; in a spirit which would enable us to arrive at some understanding, to have some mutual comprehension, so that we could live together as brothers, not as ravenous animals trying to tear one another.

Let that be one of our New Year thoughts — brotherly love and mutual comprehension. Let us try to understand; then we shall be able to forgive, and often to help. There is a story told in one of the old Jewish books that Abraham once, when camping in the desert, was accosted late at night by an old man who asked him for shelter and food. Of course he at once received him, as men do in those primitive countries, but when they came to sit down to meat, the stranger declined to join with him in his little grace, his little thanksgiving to God ; and Abraham, rising angrily, drove the man forth without food or rest, saying that he would not have in his tent one who disbelieved in God. But that same night God came in a vision to Abraham, and said: " Where is the stranger whom I sent to be your guest ?" And Abraham replied in confusion: "Lord, he believed not in Thee; he refused to give thanks; so I drove him out into the night. " But God said: "I have borne with that man for seventy years; couldest not thou bear with him for one night?" God bears with us all, because He understands us all. We cannot understand as He does as yet, but at least we can try; and be very sure that the nearer we come to understanding and making allowance, the nearer we come to Him and to His Spirit.

So let each new year which opens before us be one of brotherly love and of mutual understanding. Let us learn to co-operate with other people, and we shall already have achieved a long step on the way to the final unity. Only in that way can we hope for truly happy New Years; not years without any sorrow, without any passing cloud, for that cannot be, nor indeed would such perhaps be truly happy years for us; but years in which we shall draw ever nearer to God, Who gives us these opportunities.

CHAPTER IV

THE EPIPHANY

This Feast of the Epiphany is one of the most picturesque in the Christian year. It is in the description of the event commemorated by it that the words first occur which are so well-known to us all: "We have seen His Star in the East and are come to worship Him." The story is but briefiy told in the gospel; we hear simply that there came Wise Men from the East to Jerusalem asking where that child was to be born who was to be the King of the Jews. Since the Jewish prophets had selected for the birth of the Messiah the town of Bethlehem, the Wise Men were directed to go there; and it is said that on the way the Star, which had led them from their distant homes, again appeared to them and indicated the stable-cave in which the child Jesus was lying. And so these Wise Men went in and worshipped the Child, and offered to Him gold and frankincense and myrrh. But meantime Herod, who for the moment held the position of king of the Jews, was somewhat disturbed to hear of another claimant to that office; and so when the Wise Men did not return to describe their adventures, he sent down soldiers to Bethlehem, and tried to ensure the removal of his prospective rival by killing all the children under the age of two. Meantime the Wise Men had been warned in a dream to avoid him, and in the same way Joseph and Mary had been warned to remove the Child out of his reach.

This story, so simply told in the gospel, becomes far more gorgeous, though perhaps less credible, in ancient ecclesiastical tradition. The word "Magi" or Wise Men means what we should now call students of the inner side of things, and this would certainly in those days have included astrology; so in that way their extreme interest in an unusual star is readily explained. According to the tradition these were not merely men of learning, but kings, each ruling in his own country. The legend is not precise as to the location of the countries; but the names of the three kings are given as Melchior, Balthasar and Gaspar, and it is the universal tradition that the third was a black man — a negro from Africa. The suggestion seems to be that Melchior and Balthasar were rulers of Arabian states; but however that may be, it is stated that each king in his own place saw this strange new Star, and decided to set out upon a journey to see what it might mean.

According to this legend it was only as they approached Jerusalem, each with his own retinue, that the three kings met; and it is suggested that the arrival of these parties, all in warlike array, created much doubt and excitement, and that Herod sent out an embassy, as they drew near the city, to ask their intentions. Then, so says the story, having received the answer to their question, the three kings went together to Bethlehem with only a few personal attendants, leaving their greater retinues encamped near Jerusalem; and each of them carried many costly gifts to offer to the new-born King. But when they reached the cave and saw the little Child, it is said that they were so tremendously impressed by the magnetism which they felt, that they were altogether overcome with awe, and instead of offering the great store of gifts which they^Tiad brought, each took from his attendant whatever came nearest to hand, laid it at the Child's feet and retired with precipitation. And so it happened that Melchior presented a golden cup — fabled, naturally enough, to have been preserved by the Blessed Virgin Mary and used by the Christ Himself at the foundation of the Holy Eucharist — while Balthasar offered a golden box containing rare incense, and Gaspar a curiously-chased flask containing myrrh.

The Church has always mystically interpreted these gifts, saying that the gold showed that the Child was a King, that the offering of incense denoted His Godhead, and that the myrrh, being one of the spices especially used for sepulture, was a kind of prophecy in symbol of the death which He was presently to die. The legend puts a strange interpretation on the remark in the gospel narrative that the three kings returned to their country by another way; for it is said that the Star appeared to them at the exact moment of the birth of Jesus, and yet that they arrived at Bethlehem only twelve days later. That is explained by the statement that their way was in some manner miraculously smoothed for them, and that when after their visit they undertook to return, they found that their journey occupied many days longer than they had taken in coming. Each, so the old story tells us, was profoundly and permanently affected by what he had seen; they all agreed together to resign their respective kingdoms, and to devote themselves entirely to the religious life. The legend makes them travel together through many countries of the then known world, and they are supposed eventually to have died at the city of Cologne, where their tomb is still shown.

What foundation there may be for this strange old story it is impossible now to say; but at least it has something of antique beauty, and it is not without interest for us to know how this day was regarded in the Middle Ages. We cannot guarantee it as history, but as a symbol it is unexceptionable; for those who are the true Wise Men, those who are the true kings among the souls of men, always recognize a great Teacher when He comes ; they know Him and they come and worship Him, and they offer all that they have, to help Him in the work which He comes to do.

Whether they were kings or not, it is at least certain that the Wise Men were not Jews; and so this day has always been regarded by the Church as the manifestation of Christ to the Gentiles — the first symbol appearing in the life of the Child Jesus to show that His mission was not to His own people alone, but to the world at large. The World-Teacher justified His title and His position even thus in the very beginning of His life there in Judaea; and we can well understand that that may have been necessary. For I suppose there was never a more exclusive race than the Jews; and since He Who was born was of the seed of David, from which they hoped, many of them, that their promised Messiah would come, they would have claimed to keep Him entirely for themselves, had there not been a clear and decided indication that He came not for them only, but for the world. He never hesitated Himself to say that later on in His life, but it is at least significant and beautiful that it should thus have been indicated at its beginning — that those who were not Jews should share in His worship even so early in His life as this.

Unfortunately Christianity has inherited a great deal from the Jews. They are a wonderful race. I should be the last to seek to depreciate them and their general influence in the world in any way whatever, but the Jew of to-day is not by any means the same man as the Jew of the time of the Christ. That race, like all other races in the world, has risen from a primitive beginning to its present state of civilization. Every nation has done that; we ourselves, the English race, are in the habit of thinking ourselves at least as good as any other, but we, too, began at quite a low level. Our ancestors were not a highly evolved race; no doubt they had their own advantages and peculiarities, but they were certainly not advanced. Other races mingled with them to make this strange mixture which we now call English. Along with this Keltic race came the Saxons, the Angles, the Jutes from the mainland, but none of them were highly civilized. We hear of them roasting oxen whole and tearing them to pieces with their hands, and drinking mightily therewith. They were not a race of which to be proud. They had certain barbaric virtues; they were brave beyond all doubt; and it is said that they treated women well when they were not slaves. Into that Anglo-Saxon Keltic mixture came the Norman race, and that was somewhat more civilized before it joined the rest; but still if we read any romance of mediaeval times, we shall find that there was much to be desired in the culture of our country.

That is the way with every race in the world. The great Roman race that was so justly proud of itself arose from a small Latin tribe; so we need not hesitate to admit that the same was true of the Jews. The Jews in their early days were distinctly a barbarous tribe. We have only to read their scriptures, which contain their history, to see that. We shall find them committing terrible crimes, wholesale massacres, numerous blood-sacrifices — all sorts of horrible things were done by them, and according to their account approved by their deity, which shows that they were dealing with a tribal god, and not a great deity at all.

Certain characteristics of the Jews were intensely stamped upon them, and that idea of being a chosen people of God was one of the strongest. That is one of the things which the Christians have inherited from them, and it has been decidedly unfortunate. If we could only have accepted the Christ as the Founder of His religion and not gone back into Judaism, but taken His teachings, we should have done much better all through the ages. We should then have put aside all those ideas of a jealous God, a cruel God, a God who persecuted people to the third or fourth generation if they happened to do something which did not please Him. Christ spoke very differently; He taught us of a loving Father, and prayed that we should all be one in Him even as He was one with the Father; He did not talk of jealousy and cruelty and horror.

The Jews were intensely self-centred and thought that there was no salvation outside their own body. The evangelists sometimes put words into Christ's mouth which seem as narrow as their own ideas, for remember they also were mostly Jews. We do not know so much about Luke, but we know that Matthew, Mark and John were Jews at any rate. The speech about taking the children's bread and casting it to dogs is hardly what a World-Saviour would have said. But we can see the true attitude of the Christ peeping out in various ways, even in what is attributed to Him in the gospel. Remember how He says: "Other sheep I have, which are not of this fold" — not Jews at all, not people following Him in that incarnation — "but them also will I bring, and there shall be one fold and one shepherd." Many times He spoke of all mankind, and not of the Jews only.

Christianity as a whole has not taken the teaching of Christ as He gave it; Christianity, as it exists to-day, is much more the work of St. Paul than the work of Jesus. That may sound rather strange in the ears of many, but not, I am sure, to those who have really studied the matter. All the complicated theology, all the difficult questions that they have argued about so much in Church Councils, all those can be traced to St. Paul. It was not the sayings of the Christ that made the mystery and the trouble; He taught a perfectly straightforward religion, and what He said, if we took that by itself, would not justify a great deal of what we find in theology at the present day.

It is riot for us to say that St. Paul was wrong in the line that he took. But at least where he appears to differ from what the Christ said, it is open to us to follow the teaching of the Christ rather than that of St. Paul. The latter, however, was not born in the Holy Land, but at Tarsus, and he was a B/oman citizen by family right, so he was not so thoroughly imbued with the Jewish tradition as St. Peter. t We find them sometimes debating acrimoniously (not to say quarrelling) about various points as to whether the Jewish laws should be enforced upon all the Christian converts. The more conservative among the apostles were gradually driven from that position, and they had to let in outsiders, and to acknowledge that the teaching of Christ was intended for all; but they came to that only by slow degrees.

In Christianity we have still a strong touch of that old Jewish idea. "We do not make it a question of nationality now. We do not venture to say that only English people can be saved, or only French, or only Italians; but many are still apt to suppose that only Christians can 'be saved, and they base that silly idea upon one or two texts which they misread. It is said more than once that only through the Name of Christ can men be saved; that men must come through Him. He Himself is represented to have said: "No man cometh to the Father but -by me." But these people do not understand that the great Christ-idea is a complex thing, and that it does not always mean the Teacher Christ Jesus (the Christ using the body of the disciple Jesus), but sometimes the still greater Christ, the Son of God, the Second Person of the Everblessed Trinity.

It is absolutely true that a man may become one with the Almighty Father only by first becoming one with the Christ within the human heart, for Christ in you is the hope of glory, and there is no other hope of glory for anyone but to arouse, to awaken, the Christ-principle Within himself, to become one with that, and through that to rise to the great Father of all. Certainly through Christ alone can man escape from the round of birth and death, and reach the level where he is one with God Himself. That is most true, but it does not mean, as is often supposed, that his worship must be addressed to God only through the name of the exoteric Jesus Christ.

Men do not always understand that in those old days the name was the power; to call rightly upon the name of any Deity was to invoke the power of that Deity, and so it was through the power of the Christ within that a man could reach the highest, and through that alone. It did not mean that he must walk along this particular earthly path, and label himself a Christian. We use the word " Christ "; a Frenchman or an Italian would pronounce that name differently. Do you suppose that he would be any the further from salvation because he so pronounced that name? Do you suppose that because he called God by some other title, God would refuse to answer? Would you refuse to answer the appeal of your little child because he could not pronounce your name? Hardly. Then why should we think of God as so much worse than ourselves? All true devotion comes to God by whatever name people call Him. Some call Him le bon Dleu, some say Shiva, some Brahma or Allah, some call Him Ahuramazda. What does it matter? The prayers that are said will reach God; the name that is employed is but a form of words. It is a great pity that we have inherited this idea that we as Christians (not a nation, this time, but a religion) are those chosen to be saVed — that all the rest are outsiders left at the best to the uncovenanted mercies of God. That is a form of expression which means that the person using it is very doubtful whether they will find any mercy at all.

There is no need to take that uncharitable attitude. Even St. Paul, who was supposed to be so rigid,- was not so bigoted as many modern Christians are. This is shown by the special formula (I am not now speaking of Church history, but rather of the result of clairvoyant investigation) ^th which he prefaced his epistles. It remains to us now in only one of them, the Epistle to the Hebrews, and all commentators and biblical students are quite sure that that is the one epistle which St. Paul did not write! He began it with a rather remarkable phrase. "God, Who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in times past unto our fathers by the prophets, hath in these last days spoken unto us by His Son." There are two or three points to be noted there. We must cast aside the illusion, if it still persists with any of us, that Christ spoke English; He did not. He spoke what is called the Koine, the dialect of Greek spoken by the common people; not Aramaic, though He must also have known that, but this dialect, somewhat broken-down, as compared with the classical Greek. Only recently they have found a large ni^nber of new manuscripts in that dialect. Until then the New Testament was thought to be the only book written in it, but now we know that it was the common language of a vast number of people. Of course He used the idioms of the time, and we must ascertain the exact meaning of the words, and not blindly follow those who, before it was known that this was the common language, twisted His words to fit preconceived dogmas.

"God hath spoken by the prophets" has been taken to refer only to the Jewish prophets, those lugubrious gentlemen who were always inveighing against the Jews. Possibly those poor Jews deserved all the dreadful things that were»said of them, but at any rate it does not make pleasant or helpful reading in the present day. There are magnificent passages in the Old Testament, but there are also passages which later editors might have omitted without any serious loss. The word propketai in Greek does not mean only what we now mean by prophets. Anyone who speaks forth or preaches is called a prophet. When the soldiers said in mockery to the Christ, "Prophesy," they did not ask Him to foretell future events; they meant "Give us a speech." The verb from which it is derived means to speak out aloud as well as to foretell the future; so prophetai is equivalent to preachers and nothing more. St. Paul undoubtedly meant: "God in times past has spoken to our ancestors in many ways and at many different times by other preachers, and now in these days He has spoken unto us by His Son" —by One Who is a special manifestation of the divine power. Those preachers by whom God had spoken in the past were the Lord Buddha, Vyasa, Zoroaster, Thoth, Orpheus — all the great men who had founded religions. They, too, were all manifestations of the same mighty Teacher ; they too were messengers of God, at those other times and to those to whom they were sent.

Mankind differs, happily; it would be a poor world if we were all alike. In successive stages of evolution, and in various countries, men have differed very widely. To each of those types and classes of men appropriate religions have been preached, each by its own preacher; but all religions point to the same rule. They all teach to men exactly the same life. They differ in the names that they apply to things; but we must learn that names are external labels and do not matter. All alike tell us that the good man is the unselfish, the charitable, the kindly, the gentle; all alike tell us that offences against others, murder, stealing, outrages of any sort upon another are the most terrible crimes. Their teaching is identical, but they put it in a different form according to what is most needed at the time. And so even St. Paul tells us that God has spoken many times to our fathers, who assuredly were Gentiles and not Jews, and now in these last days He has spoken to us through this special manifestation which we call His Son.

Christianity is one of the great paths up the mountain of light at the summit of which sits God Himself. It is one of the paths, but only one, and if we have a number of people all round the base of the mountain, the shortest path to the top for each man is the path which opens before him. It would be foolish to have the idea that we must go and drag a man all round the base of the mountain in order to make him walk up our particular path.

Our efforts to convert people from other religions and modes of worship are unnecessary and presumptuous. The effort to bring to the knowledge of God people who are ignorant of His ways is a grand and noble action; that we should by deed as well as by word preach our belief that there is a God, and that to live as He would have men live is the only sure way to comfort and peace — that is a noble work; but to try to convert a man who is already good along his own line in order to make him good along ours is not a sensible thing to do.

If members of other religions acted as many of our people do, and tried to make us worship as they do, we should say: "What is the use of this? We have our own ways of worship ; why should we leave them to take up this other?" Can we not see that they might say exactly the same to us? It is all the result of this mad idea .that our way is the only way, that our presentation is the best possible presentation. It may be the best for us; but why cannot we realize that the presentation which the same God has put before them may be the best for them? It was God and none other that decreed that these men should be born as Buddhists and Hindus, while He gaVe to us Christian bodies. How comes it that we are here and they there? It is by the great law which is the expression of God's will. So let each man be fully persuaded in his own mind ; but let each man go his own way, and not try to interfere with those of others. All paths lead to the top, so long as the same good life is led.

It does not matter in what words a man expresses his belief, assuredly he shall attain. That is the great lesson, I think, of this manifestation of Christ to the Gentiles; the Gentiles merely meaning foreigners, those who are not Jews. Let us then realize strongly that there are many ways; that it is not for us to say that one way is better than the other. No doubt it seems so to us, but it is not necessarily so for the other man; and that is true not only of the great religions, but even of sects as well.

There are three hundred Christian sects and more. They are all from God. We see the advantages of our particular method, because we have constantly experienced its help. We of the Liberal Catholic Church, for instance, partake of the Holy Sacrament and feel the splendid outpouring of love and strength that we receive in this way, and we think: "No one who does not take this or feel this can get on nearly so well in religion." That is true for ourselves; but we must try to realize that many of these other people may stand on a different line, and what appeals so strongly to us may not appeal to a Methodist, for example. Let each man go his own way; let us by all means recommend ours to him, since we find it so beautiful, but in thus recommending it we must always be utterly charitable inside as well as outside. We must not only say in words: "I think your plan is probably as good as mine, but it differs"; we must really feel inside ourselves that every man has his own way, and it is not for us to take him out of his way and put him into another. We must not have the slightest feeling that he is not quite up to our level, which I think we are a little apt to feel if we are not careful. Each man can be helped on his own line ; Jew or Gentile, what matters it ? High Church, Low Church, we are all trying to serve God each in his own way, and that is what we have to learn. We have all sorts of beautiful feelings within us; let us give the other man credit for having the same in his own way. So shall we all, through our recognition of the Fatherhood of God, come to feel as true brothers to all our fellowmen, and that is the great end and aim of it all, that we may be one in Christ, whatever we may call Him, as He is one with the Father.

We know that the Star in the East, whose shining we celebrate at the Epiphany, has been taken as its standard and symbol by a world-wide Society called the Order of the Star in the East, to which I have already referred — an Order which especially asks those who join it to devote themselves to the endeavour to fit themselves for the second Coming of the Christ, that they may know Him when He comes and be ready to offer Him service. This Order was not founded actually upon this festival, but five days later, on January llth; but on this anniversary we may well bear it in mind. The business of its members is also to try, so far as may be, to prepare others too, to induce some people at least in the midst of all the turmoil and confusion of the world to pay attention to this second Coming, which we hold will not be long delayed. Therefore it is indeed well that we should think of it. Those of us who are keenly interested may well join this Order which exists to prepare His way. It has branches in every country in the world; it publishes many pamphlets and books, a list of which can be obtained from its Headquarters, 314 Regent Street, London, W. But whether we join it or not, at any rate let us think clearly and definitely of what we shall do when He shall come.

Let us take to heart the lesson of the Star. All through Advent we were preparing ourselves worthily to celebrate the birth of the Christ- Child, and this culminated at Christmas, when we thought of all that that birth has meant to us, and expressed our devoutest thankfulness for it in all its various significations. Now this great festival, which comes just twelve days later, is intended to indicate to us the translation of all that joy into action. We have prepared for the Coming: we have celebrated it; now what have we to do with regard to it? How can we share this joy with our fellowmen? The three kings were the first Christian preachers; the first to go forth and proclaim to the world the birth of the new-born King — King not of provinces and of armies, but of the hearts and souls of men. The legend tells us that they gave up all in order to preach His Coming. We, in these days, are not called upon to make so great a sacrifice, yet surely all the more should we devote whatever time and energy we can spare to trying to spread the good news. Let no mere worldly business, no worldly work or ambition come between us and the Lord Who shall come suddenly to His Temple. Let us be ready to recognize Him and follow Him, even as did the Wise Men of old, and let us offer to Him most heartily and thoroughly the gold of our love, the frankincense of our worship, and the myrrh of our self-sacrifice. So shall we repeat those gifts of old at a higher and a spiritual level; so will the Star shine not in vain for those of us who have qualified themselves to recognize His Coming.

It may be very soon, so it would be unwise to delay our preparation. There were many before who knew nothing of His Coming; all the great kings of the earth, all the rich men, all the most intellectual people of Greece, of Rome and of Egypt paid no attention to Him at all. His immediate followers, if we are to believe the story, were a few poor fishermen, and others like them, but none of any distinction, none of great learning, none of high position. Shall that be the same this time? "We do not know, but at least let us put ourselves in the attitude in which we shall recognize Him. Before, there was one forerunner to proclaim His Coming; this time there should be many thousands of us who try to prepare the way of the Lord and make His paths straight. There surely can be no nobler message than that; there can be nothing more beautiful for us to put before the world.

It has sometimes been objected: "Suppose after all we should be misleading people; suppose He should decide not to come as yet." Well, even then, have you done any harm by trying to prepare people for His Coming? If it should be that, for some reason known only in the counsels of the Most High, He should postpone His Coming, to have prepared ourselves to receive Him is still a great and noble work. We shall be better and not worse for having tried to put ourselves in the attitude of receptivity to that mighty influence, and no harm can possibly be done by such preparation; whereas if He should come and find us unready, should we ever cease to regret it through all the centuries yet to come?

He Himself said that before He came again there would be much confusion and much trouble in the world — that many should run to and fro, and that there should be false Christs rising up everywhere. So it may well be that there will be many who do not recognize and follow Him when He shall come. Indeed, it is certain that there will be some who in His own name will refuse to listen to Him. They will say: "Christ came once two thousand years ago; we follow the teaching which He gave us then. We cannot be led aside from that by any other teaching." And so in His own name, and out of a certain kind of loyalty to Him, they will fail to recognize Him when He shall come again.

Let that not be so with us. As the Star arose in the sky, and led those three kings to Bethlehem, so is there a Star which shines before all who will see it even now, though it be no longer a physical phenomenon. If that Star were truly visible in the sky two thousand years ago, millions must have seen it, but only three understood and followed it. There is no information given in the story as to whether they alone were favoured by that sight. We cannot say; but at least it is sure that, for all those whose inner eyes are opened, there are clear indications now of the near Coming of the same great World-Teacher once more. We might truly say, as He is reported to have said when He addressed the Jews: "There be many standing here who shall not taste death until they see the Lord Christ." Whether He really said that or not we cannot say; it seems improbable, for surely He must have known. But now, at least, the signs are clear; now it seems that the time is drawing near. Let us be ready for it; let us be prepared to receive that greater Epiphany of the Christ. Let us be among those Wise Men who have watched for His Coming, who recognize Him when He does come and are prepared to lay at His feet the gifts of their love and devotion and service. We have indeed a gospel to preach, just as truly as the Wise Men of old. Let us see to it that we do not lose the wonderful opportunity that has been offered to us — that we do not fall short in the performance of an obvious duty.

It is not for me to prescribe what each shall do; each man will do what he can in his own way. But at least let each one see to it that he is definitely doing something. There are many ways in which work may be done for the Star, but this much is clear, that whatever else we may be able to do for it in the way of active work, we at least owe it this duty — that we should live for it. We who preach the Star to others must assuredly show forth its influence in our daily life, its wisdom, its strength, its joy, its peace, its freedom and its lovingkindness.* We who love the Star should ourselves >be as stars to help to illumine the world in which we move; we must try, each according to his capacity, to shine and to show forth in purity, in gentleness, and in steadfastness the light that is within us. So this day is linked with those that have preceded it, for we cannot better show forth the glory of the Star than by perpetuating, all through the year that lies before us, the very attitude of kindliness and brotherliness upon which we have already resolved. On the day of the Star let its glory shine about us, and let us ever remember that it is with it, as with all other good things — that only in the proportion in which we can share it with our fellows shall we receive its fullest blessing.

* See [Starlight](https://archive.org/details/starlightsevenad00lead), by C. W. Leadbeater

CHAPTER V

THE BAPTISM OF OUR LORD

We have chosen January 15th for the celebration of the Baptism of our Lord. It is not that we know it in any way to be the anniversary of that occasion, for the Church has lost the exact date, so far as we are aware. The gospel account of that Baptism tells us that Jesus Himself came to His forerunner, John the Baptist, and asked for this rite to be administered to Him. John not unnaturally objected in his humility, and said: "I have need to be baptized of Thee, and comest Thou to me?" That is to say: "Thou art much greater and more highly developed than I, why dost Thou want to be baptized by me?" And Jesus said: "Suffer it to be so now; for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness." And so He accepted the sacrament. What He meant evidently was: "This is a mark of a certain stage. In this birth of mine I also must fulfil the law — the normal course of all those who try to reach the higher levels — and therefore I, though I be in truth beyond all this, in the outer world must fulfil all righteousness. I must pass through all these stages just as anyone else." Just so, if the greatest of saints came back to earth and was reborn, would he pass through all the sacraments of the Church, through baptism and. confirmation, though he might be far beyond what they ordinarily mean or symbolize to us.

So Jesus passed through this, and therefore as a perfect example showed us that we also should pass through all the prescribed rites, no matter whether we feel ourselves to be beyond what they can give. It is easy for a man to deceive himself; there have been those who have said: "I do not need any outer sacrament; I can receive no benefit from such things." It may be so, for we all know that any man may draw near to the Christ at any level without an intermediary. It is possible; it has been done, though rarely ; and perhaps it is not well rashly to decide that we can dispense with all help. We may be great saints in disguise, but it is better to be on the safe side.

Make no mistake as to this ; any man, at any stage, who turns his thought towards the Christ, or sends an aspiration to Him, will unquestionably call forth a response, and will be the better for his effort. But the same expenditure of force will bring a far greater return if it be expended along the channel already prepared by Christ for His people and designated by His Church for our use. It is much easier to walk along a carefully levelled road than to force one's way through the entanglements of a pathless jungle; and when the road is already there, lovingly provided for that especial purpose, why should one be so ungracious as to refuse to walk in it?

If we follow the teaching and the rites of the Church, be very sure that they will do great good to us, however advanced we may feel ourselves to be inwardly. For the greater a man is the more he can receive from the sacraments and the rites of Holy Church. So we may well follow the example of the Christ: " Suffer it to be so now, for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness." It is an apt and beautiful symbol.

It is well that we should think sometimes of the path of development that lies before us. We should note the different steps and what is required of those who would take them, and frequently examine ourselves and see in what way, and to what extent, we fall short now of that which is required, because although we may still be at some distance from such spiritual possibilities as these, at least we ought to be trying to qualify ourselves for this which lies before each one of us. A man may say humbly: "I am not a great saint; I am very far from that. I have all sorts of faults and failings." No doubt; for we all have. But God does not tie us down to a limited time. We must not think of this one little life as all that is given to us. If so, it would indeed be a mockery to say to us: "Be ye perfect as your Father in heaven is perfect." How can we be? We know how far we fall short of it ; how can we carry out that command ? Yet would that command have been given if it had been impossible for us? It is not impossible, precisely because we have before us plenty of time for our efforts. Never a moment to waste, but such time as we need we shall have. If we do not succeed in this life, we shall come back again and again until we do succeed, exactly as a child goes to school day after day, and in between the days of work he goes home and takes off the clothing he has worn for his school-life, and goes to bed and rests. Just so we take off the robe of flesh — this physical bodjr— and live in the spiritual body. And then presently we come out of that stage of rest, and come back yet again and assume the garment of earthly life —the physical body.

That was well known in the time of Christ. We read that He said to His disciples: "Whom do men say that I am?" And they answered Him: "Some say that Thou art the prophet Elias (Elijah) : some say Thou art Jeremiah or one of the prophets." And then He explained to them that John the Baptist was Elijah, so He could not be he. He said to them: "If ye will receive it, Elias has already come." And then He asked whom they took Him to be, and Peter gave the reply: "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the Living God." So it is clear that He knew, and those to whom He spoke knew, that it was possible for people to come back again in other bodies. Also He was asked, when they brought to Him a man who was born blind: "Who did sin, this man or his parents, that he was born blind T" How could a man have sinned and been born blind as a punishment for it, unless the sin had been committed in some former life? They clearly grasped the doctrine of reincarnation, but because that doctrine has since been dropped aside, a great deal in the scripture and in the Creed appears unintelligible to people. We must try to recover this ancient doctrine and to apprehend all that follows from it. The faith may have been once for all delivered to the saints, but it does not follow that it was fully understood by them. Many advancements have been made in knowledge of all kinds since then; perchance in religion also we may come to comprehend much better what has been said than some of them did.

So let us observe these different festivals. Let us try not merely to follow these things as anniversaries, but to remember the symbolism and under-stand it; and when we have learnt the lesson which it has to teach, let us try to live according to that lesson. If we are some day to attain these great stages we must live now so as to fit ourselves day by day for this drawing nearer and nearer to the Christlike state of mind which alone will enable us to live the life which the Christ would have us live. We must recognize from the beginning that the requirements of the spiritual life are high, and that no man can hope to follow his Leader up this mighty ladder of evolution unless he is indeed willing to devote himself, spirit, soul and body with all his strength to Him. It is not necessary that he should retire altogether from the world. That has been a common error. The demands of the higher spiritual development are so great that a man may well be pardoned if he feels that he should devote every moment of his lifetime to them, and in the past that has been done to a great extent. In older civilizations and in earlier religions men almost always commenced the pursuit of the really higher life by becoming hermits or monks. A man gave up the world altogether; he consigned himself to an existence of absolute poverty, absolute chastity and self-control, and lived altogether in the higher meditation. Sometimes there was a slight modification of that. In the Buddhist religion a man who becomes a monk does not necessarily devote the whole of his life to contemplation, but he does emphatically devote it wholly to doing good. All through the earlier history of Christianity we find that many of its saints did exactly the same thing. Either they became hermits or they entered some monastery, so that their surroundings might make it comparatively easy for them to live wholly for the spirit.

For us in these days a harder task is set. The great keynote of our spiritual lives is to be of service. The highest service of God is to serve Him in the person of our fellowmen; and in order that we may devote ourselves to that service it is necessary that we should remain in the world, even though we may not be of the world in the sense that worldly matters bulk most largely for us. We must not therefore feel ourselves superior to the monk or the hermit of old. It is not true to say that one who passed altogether out of the ordinary business life of the world thought only of himself and his own development. Such men help greatly in the elevation of the .spiritual tone of the world as a whole. There are many people wholly given up to business and to pleasure; in order to balance that, it is surely well that among the human race there should be some who give up all their strength to the higher life of meditation, and we must not for a moment think that these men of old were necessarily selfish in doing that. They were flooding the world with a higher type of spiritual thought and devotional feeling than would have been possible in those days for ordinary men engaged in business. We should not at all think of those people as doing nothing; but, as I have said, a harder task is put before us — that we should remain in the world and still develop that higher spiritual nature as much as we might have done if we had retired altogether from ordinary life.

Some may object: "But that is impracticable; how can we be so much sponger spiritually than were those great men of old?" The reason is that we, some of us, are those great men of old, come back again in other bodies to czfrry our development in the following of our Lord Christ a little further than we carried it before. If some of us succeeded, in that older civilization, in living the spiritual life apart from the world, the strength that we gained then will help us now to try to live the spiritual life in the world. We can still flood that world with higher thought and with the noblest devotional feeling, but we can have also the inestimable advantage of being among our fellowmen and therefore bringing a more direct influence to bear upon them. Again some may think: "That is all very well for a preacher or a lecturer; no doubt he sheds out a certain amount of influence, but what can we do? We live quite ordinary lives; we have to earn our living, and we have to keep our wives and families; how can we shed an influence abroad?"

Every human being is doing so, all the time; whether he knows it or whether he never thinks of it, he is nevertheless affecting the lives of all those about him, and not only by what he says or does; every thought that he thinks affects other minds around him, every word that he utters may be so arranged as to carry a good feeling with it. A man cannot be always • preaching ; but all his thoughts, his words and his deeds should be such as to shed a holy and Christlike influence on those about him. That is the essence of the spiritual life; that is what everyone of us, at his level and in his degree, should be doing.

To attain to the level of the first great Initiation a man must dominate his body by means of his soul; he must so arrange that all his feelings are in harmony with the highest feeling. When the second of the great steps comes the same process is carried a stage farther, and in the second Initiation, of which this Baptism of our Lord is the symbol, the man's mind, and not only his feeling, is brought into tune with the Christ-mind. The latter is still infinitely above it, of course, for we are only men, and very frail and human, while He rises above humanity as a Superman ; but nevertheless our thoughts should lie along the line of His thoughts. Just as the man who is beginning to tread the Path says: "In these circumstances what would the Christ have done? let me do the same," so the man who has passed that second stage should watch his thought every moment and say to himself: "What would the Christ have thought in such a case as this? How would this thing have envisaged itself to Him?"

The same great thought exists in our religion as in all the older faiths. All religions are as coloured lenses through which shines the same bright light; they are all statements of the same great truth; therefore whatever is found philosophically stated in those older faiths is to be found also represented in this, the latest of the great religions. Because wa are Christians we need not necessarily be ignorant, although it is quite true that in the early days of the Church most of the Christians were drawn from unlearned people, and a vast heritage of misunderstanding has come down to us from those times of ignorance. It is for us now to add to our faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, as St. Peter put it, so that while we hold the same old faith, we may hold it far more intelligently than did our forefathers, because we know now what it symbolizes; so instead of taking statements as literally historic which on the face of them are incredible, we realize their meaning in this mighty myth of progress, and therefore we learn from them instead of forcing ourselves to accept them without comprehension.

Never again will a great leader of the Church say : Credo quia impossibUe, which means: "I believe it because it is impossible. " When we find a statement which on the face of it looks incredible, we say: "What is the meaning of this? For it must have a meaning, and it must have a place, or we should not find it in this our faith/' It would have been well if the early Church Fathers in the Christian religion had followed the example of the great Council of the religious Fathers of the Buddhist religion. When those men met to formulate doctrine after the death of the Buddha, finding many curious statements and distortions of His sayings put before them, their decision was: "Nothing whatever which is not in accordance with reason and common sense can be the teaching of the Buddha." I wish the Christian Fathers had adopted that same line of thought; it would have saved us much trouble.

Only those who have seen one of the great Initiations can say how good is the symbolism which the Church has adopted for them. The first does distinctly symbolize a birth; the Master Who is acting as Initiator expands His aura, His higher vehicles, and absolutely enfolds within Himself the pupil, and the pupil comes forth from that contact a new man in many ways, so it may truly be described as a birth. In the second Initiation there is a downpouring of force from on high which is aptly symbolized by a baptism — a tremendous rush of power down from the Initiator upon the Initiated. It is a veritable baptism of the Holy Ghost and o'f fire, as the Christ described it; it is a fiery flood which is poured down, and it has undoubtedly the appearance of a stream of living light. If we realize the symbolical meaning of all these things we shall understand that they make a coherent sequence, and that each year the Church in this way sets before us the path we have to tread, in the hope that contemplating it we shall learn to understand it, and that we shall then develop within ourselves the requirements which are needed for each of these great steps.

There is no mystery about these requirements; they are given in many of our books. I myself made a list of them at the end of my little book Invisible Helpers. I use there the Oriental terms, but we find the same stages in the Christian teaching under the names of Conversion, Purification, Illumination, and Perfection. Perfection corresponds to what is called in the East the Arhat Initiation. St. Paul is reported to have said: "We speak wisdom to them that are perfect" — a remark which does not sound particularly intelligent if we take the word in its ordinary signification, but is luminous and clear when we know that "perfect" is a technical word for a certain degree in the Christian Mysteries. The meaning is simply "We speak of the secrets of the higher degree only to those who have taken that degree." The more that we can develop of these qualifications now, the easier will be our task when the great time comes for us, and the sooner will that time come. Therefore we should already be laying a foundation even for the very highest of the steps of the Path. We should already be familiar with what we have to do in the unfolding of our inner powers, and we should be trying in our small way to do it. We should try with all our hearts, with all our minds, with all our strength.

Not that we can immediately succeed, because it is a work of a long time. This evolution of man has continued slowly and surely through thousands and thousands of years in the past. Now it is beginning to quicken, because the goal is coming in sight —because now we are beginning to move intelligently in the right direction, instead of being merely swept hither and thither by all kinds of cross currents. Evolution is moving all the time, and whether we take an intelligent part in it or not, we are being steadily carried onward and upward. But as soon as we begin to understand and to swim for ourselves instead of drifting with the tide, our progress becomes much more rapid, and we can cooperate with comprehension in the mighty work which God is doing for us. So it is worth our while to try to understand all these stages.

The first Initiation is chiefly concerned with the conquering of the idea of separateness and the establishment of the man on a firm basis; the second Initiation deals largely with the development of his mental and psychic powers and faculties. The actual effect of this Initiation is an enormous expansion of the mental body. How much of that can act down here in the physical brain of the man is quite another matter. It takes many years for the full effect of that Initiation to show itself in the lower life, and it is a time of considerable strain, and even of danger for the man if he is not very careful to keep his vibrations pure and high and noble. That also is symbolized in the gospel drama, for immediately after receiving this Baptism, the Christ retires for forty days into the desert to strengthen and develop Himself — to adjust the lower vehicles to what has been done with the higher ones.

Forty days may suffice for a Christ, but for most of us forty years would be nearer the mark. Less than that perhaps, but not very much less will it take us to adapt ourselves perfectly to the development; but the work must be done. Some will not (or possibly cannot) adjust themselves, and those people break. To safeguard ourselves against that disaster we must learn at an earlier stage to keep our thoughts on a pure, high level, to be persistent always in well-doing, to have the one unselfish object of helping the world always before us, and not to let ourselves be diverted from it by any sort of prejudice, or by any sort of personal feeling or weakness in any way. So shall our advance proceed smoothly and steadily, and we shall progress as we are meant to do.

Every step of the path brings its own difficulties and its own especial strain; but every step of the path also brings its own enormous accession of strength to the soul — to the ego, the true man. Progress is always gradual, particularly at this stage of which we are speaking now. But if the man succeeds, that which is so beautifully put before us in the Epistle for the festival of the Baptism of our Lord becomes true of him. The Spirit of the Lord rests upon him, because he is drawn up to a higher level; he is now more in harmony with that Spirit, and is a better channel for it. So the Spirit rests upon him, the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of counsel and of might — of great wisdom, but also of great power; the Spirit of knowledge and of reverence to the Lord. Those are the characteristics which should be showing forth through the man when he reaches that level. It is said of him: "He shall not judge after the sight of his eyes" (that is, after mere outer appearance), "neither reprove after the hearing of his ears" (that is, he shall not take anything on hearsay), "but with righteousness shall He judge the poor, and reprove with equity for" (that is, on 'behalf of) "the meek of the earth."

You will notice what great stress is laid there upon justice, gentleness, tolerance. All those are the characteristics of the man who is making progress, the man who is trying to bring his mind into harmony with the mind of the Christ. We are told in another place in our scripture: "Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus," and that is what the man should be doing at this stage of his Baptism with Fire. Both the Christ and John the Baptist used that expression, the Baptism of the Holy Ghost and of Fire, showing it to be really a technical phrase in the Mysteries, referring to the tremendous downpouring of divine force which comes at that second Initiation to the man who is fortunate enough to reach it.

Chief among his characteristics, then, should be righteousness, faith, fairness, and, above all, gentlemanliness. A great poet said of the Christ that He was the first true gentleman who ever lived. All these things should be the characteristics of our development on the path. It is said of the Initiate that he shall neither hurt nor destroy in all the holy mountain of that higher progress. There shall be no hurt, no power or fear or even possibility of hurting the feelings or the reputation of others. Most carefully, most skilfully will the man who is drawing thus near to higher things order his action, his speech and his thought, so that no harm shall be done by any of these to any living creature. In the Hindu Scripture we find the teaching that ahimsa or perfect harmlessness is the great characteristic of the developed man: harmlessness not only on the physical plane, but on the emotional and mental as well — that the man shall be incapable of harm, not only that he shall be careful not to harm. He should have reached the stage at which he can do only good to his fellowmen; and the reason why he can do only good is given in the concluding words of the Epistle — that the man is "full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea." It is said there that the earth shall be so filled. It will be a long time yet before all mankind stands at such a level as that, before absolutely the whole earth shall be recognizably filled with the glory of the Lord. In truth it is filled with that glory even now if we can only see it; but what is indicated is a condition when all men upon earth will realize it, when His will shall be done on earth, even as it is in heaven.

We are far from that; yet perhaps we may not be so far from it as we sometimes think. We are only just at the end of the most awful war in the history of the world, and though that actual war is over and justice has triumphed, there is an immense amount of social unrest all over the world, and we have not arrived at a millennium yet. Great changes have come, and are in process of coming; surely there will be on the whole a great movement towards good. There may be an intermediate time which will be very unpleasant, while things are still settling down. It is the interval of readjustment, the trough between two waves of evolution, but out of it all, we hope and believe, will come something grander than we have yet seen. Whether the best will be made out of it depends upon us, as well as upon other people. A man may think, "I am not a person of any importance. I have a vote certainly, but it is only one out of millions." That is not the point. It is true that the actual government of a country is in the hands of its politicians, but any kind of constitution, any arrangement will work well if the hearts of the people are right, and if they have loving brotherly feeling one towards another; and no constitution, however excellent, will work satisfactorily if these feelings and conditions are absent. So everyone of us has a share in this future — everyone of us can distinctly help in his own circle to make it possible for the great changes to come smoothly, if he will follow such teaching as is here given to us by the Church.

That is why we should be educating and training ourselves to take due part in the life that lies before us all. This spiritual development, which sometimes seems rather far away and in the clouds, is not really far from us at all, because we gain these heights step by step, and we must be developing all these qualities in ourselves day by day in order that we may the sooner reach the highest, so that through us the whole world can be helped. Those who are clairvoyant, those who can see, know as a fact how closely the world is knit together. The rest must take it largely on evidence, though there is surely plenty of evidence even for those who cannot see. No man liveth to himself, not for a moment; always he is influencing other people by his thought, his feelings, as well as by what he does and what he is. Every man has a share in the world 's work, and every man must take it. And if you who draw nearer to the Christ will follow the Christ in your thoughts and words and works, then shall the world all the sooner be ready to worship at His Feet and to follow Him whither He would lead it, when (so soon) He comes among us once more.

Even now at our present stage we may have this much share in this second Initiation — that we may try to develop our minds; we may try to understand our religion intelligently. Let that then be for you the lesson of this festival. "We must be able to give a reason for the faith that is in us. We must try to understand what is meant by the teachings of our religion. All religions are the same, in that all alike teach us that the path of holiness is the only way to reach final perfection; but our especial line in Christianity is to try to develop ourselves by means of service to others, realizing the truth of the words which the Christ Himself uttered: "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto the least of these My little ones, ye have done it unto Me."

